The Riddle House stands on a hilltop in Little Hangleton. Much mystery has arisen around it. Fifty years ago, its inhabitants, the Riddle family, were killed in a most mysterious manner, leaving no signs of bodily harm, seeming almost as if they had been frightened to death. The villagers instantly suspected Frank Bryce, the Riddles' stiff and misanthropic gardener, and even after he was questioned and found innocent, the villagers still mistrusted him, and the village boys often bothered him.

One night, fifty years later, the elderly Frank is refilling his hot water bottle to ease the soreness of his joints, when he sees a bright light inside the Riddle House, and he immediately knows that the boys have set a fire. He limps over to the house, lets himself in with his spare key, walks up the dusty staircase, and stands in the hallway next to a room, where he overhears a conversation between two voices, one high pitched controlling one, another nervous submissive one. Frank overhears the controlling one, who reveals his name to be Lord Voldemort, telling the other one, whom he calls Wormtail, that he must wait for the Quidditch World Cup to end before capturing a boy named Harry Potter.

Wormtail suggests using a different boy, but Lord Voldemort refuses. Wormtail pleads his loyalty by reminding his master that he brought him Bertha Jorkins, whose information proved quite useful before they had to kill her to prevent her from talking. Frank is horrified at this news, and is frightened when a thick, twelve-foot long snake slithers past him and into the room and begins hissing back and forth with Lord Voldemort. At this, Lord Voldemort calls Frank into the room and kills him in a single flash of green light; at that moment miles away, the boy named Harry Potter awoke in the night.

Harry Potter, a fourteen-year-old wizard, wakes to feel the scar on this forehead throbbing in pain. He looks around his dark room in alarm, remembering that the last time his scar hurt him was when Lord Voldemort was nearby. The book proceeds to explain that Lord Voldemort was the leader of the dark side of wizardry, the murderer of Harry's parents, and reason why Harry even has the scar. After murdering Harry's parents, Lord Voldemort turned on Harry with the same curse, which miraculously rebounded and stripped Voldemort of his power, leaving Harry with a scar and no parents.

Harry paces the room, debating what to do. He cannot tell the Dursleys, his relatives with whom he lives, because they detest his presence as well as magic. He cannot tell his best friend Hermione, because she would find it alarming and want him to inform Dumbledore. He cannot tell his other best friend, Ron, because Ron would think it was a false alarm. Finally, Harry decides to write to Sirius Black, his godfather whose escape Harry assisted in Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban. Black has been wrongly imprisoned for killing thirteen people in addition to turning Harry's parents over to Voldemort. Harry and his friends discovered that this work had actually been done by Peter Pettigrew who is also known as Wormtail. Black was innocent. Harry writes him a short letter and walks down to breakfast.

When Harry arrives downstairs for breakfast, nobody blinks an eye. Uncle Vernon is buried behind the morning paper, and his son Dudley is sulking furiously about the grapefruit that Aunt Petunia is slicing into quarters. Dudley's school has written to the Dursleys, saying that they have no knickerbockers to accommodate his gigantic behind. Dursely has gone on a diet. Aunt Petunia has placed the whole family under Dudley's diet, which Harry has survived by asking his friends to send him food by owl.

Breakfast is interrupted by the arrival of the postman with a letter, and Uncle Vernon calls Harry into a side room. He is furious that the letter is from Ron's mother, Molly Weasley, who is inviting Harry to attend the Quidditch World Cup and stay with her family for the rest of the summer. What most infuriates Uncle Vernon is that the letter is in an envelope covered in dozens of stamps. Uncle Vernon makes it clear that he doesn't want Harry around for the rest of the summer, but that he doesn't want Harry to get his way by getting to leave. Finally Harry mentions casually that he must finish a letter to Sirius Black, and Uncle Vernon looks terrified and grumpily tells Harry to go, not wanting a convicted murderer to show up thinking that Harry is being mistreated.

Harry bounces upstairs delightedly to find that his snowy owl, Hedwig, has returned from a night flight, and that another, smaller owl is zooming around the room. The smaller owl, Pig, is Ron Weasley's new owl, and it delivered a note from Ron saying for Harry to be ready to leave for the Quidditch Cup the following night at five. Harry writes back to Ron and sends his letter out to Sirius, feeling most optimistic about the end of the summer.

Harry packs his trunks and is ready to leave by noon the next day; the Dursleys are all silent and terrified. Uncle Vernon makes several snide comments about how he hopes that the Weasleys will think to dress properly. Five o'clock comes and the Weasleys have not yet arrived. Finally, at a quarter past five, loud banging sounds come from inside the Dursleys' boarded-up fireplace, and Harry knows instantly that the Weasleys have tried to travel by Floo Powder through the fireplace network. Arthur Weasley's voice warns Harry to stand back, before the fireplace explodes, revealing the red-haired figures of Ron, the twins Fred and George, and their father, Arthur. They greet the Dursleys politely, but the Dursleys simply stare, while Dudley disappears, clutching his bottom, which spouted a pig's tail during his last encounter with a grown wizard.

Fred and George head upstairs to retrieve Harry's trunk from his room, while Mr. Weasley bravely attempts conversation with the Dursleys, who are unresponsive. When the twins return with Harry's trunk, one of them drops a pocketful of sweets on his way back to the fireplace. Harry and Mr. Weasley are the only two wizards remaining in the living room. They find that Dudley has devoured one of the sweets, thus enlarging his tongue. Aunt Petunia shrieks and tries to pull his tongue out of his mouth, while Uncle Vernon throws ornaments at Mr. Weasley. Mr. Weasley tries to restore the tongue.

arrives at The Burrow, The Weasleys' home, in a dizzy state from traveling by Floo powder. He instantly notices two older Weasleys sitting at the kitchen table. He is introduced to the eldest members of the family: Charlie, who works with dragons in Romania, and Bill, who works at Gringotts bank in Egypt. Suddenly Mr. Weasley arrives in the fireplace, furious with the twins for giving Ton-Tongue Toffee to Dudley. As he reprimands them, his wife, Molly Weasley, enters the kitchen. Harry, Ron, Ron's sister Ginny, and Hermione, who also is visiting, all troop upstairs away from Molly Weasley's rage. On their way up, they encounter the smug and hardworking Percy, another Weasley brother who has just graduated from Hogwarts and now is working for the Ministry of Magic. Ron admires the eldest two brothers and the twins, but is scornful of Percy.

They all remain in Ron's room for a bit, discussing Percy's job and Weasleys' Wizard Wheezes, a line of magical jokes that Fred and George have been perfecting. Their mother disapproves. Harry, Ron, Hermione, and Ginny go downstairs to find Mrs. Weasley cooking dinner and complaining about the twins. They dart outside to find that Bill and Charlie have levitated a pair of tables and are using magic to make them crash into each other. Percy yells from his window for them to pipe down. Eventually they all sit down for a twilight meal. A cozy evening ensues, filled with simple family arguments. Percy complains about how Ludo Bagman, a friend of Mr. Weasley and the head of Magical Games and Sports within the Ministry of Magic, has managed to lose one of his workers, a woman named Bertha Jorkins. Mrs. Weasley tells Bill to cut his hair and get rid of his earring. The twins and Charlie discuss the potential outcome of the next day's Quidditch World Cup. Harry feels at peace to be with the Weasleys, and is excited to be going to the World Cup.

Early the following morning, Harry is awakened by Mr. Weasley, who is dressed in Muggle clothes instead of his usual wizard robes. He is trying not to be noticed and thought odd as he leaves the safety of the wizard world and ventures to the World Cup. He, Ron, Ginny, Hermione, Harry, Fred, and George must leave early in the morning to get to the Cup. The eldest three Weasleys are able to Apparate, disappearing from one place and reappearing almost instantly elsewhere. Everybody is grumpy and tired. The early morning tension escalates when Mrs. Weasley calls out "Accio!", casting a spell that extracts dozens of Ton-Tongue- Toffees from the twins' pockets. Everybody except for Mrs. Weasley leaves the house and walks through the cold morning air to Stoatshead Hill. Mr. Weasley explains that because it would be impossible to fit thousands of wizards at once onto Hogwarts Express, or Diagon Alley, alternate means for transportation are used for events such as the World Cup. In this case, they were to use a Portkey.

At the top of the hill, they encounter Cedric Diggory, a handsome Hogwarts student and the Seeker for the Hufflepuff Quidditch team, and his father, Amos Diggory. Amos Diggory spies Harry, and embarrasses everybody by talking about how Cedric beat the famous Harry Potter in last year's Quidditch game between Hogwarts Houses. The Diggorys have found the Portkey, a dilapidated boot, and at five a.m. they all touch it. It jerks them from the bellybutton and spins them all blindly through the air. When they arrive shakily at the campground, only Mr. Diggory, Mr. Weasley, and Cedric are able to land on their feet.

At the site of the Quidditch World Cup, Harry, Hermione, and the Weasleys are directed to their campgrounds, where Mr. Weasley struggles to pay Muggle currency to the site manager, old Muggle named Mr. Roberts. The task of creating a place where a hundred thousand wizards can congregate undiscovered is no easy feat, as the frantic Ministry wizards remind Mr. Weasley many times throughout this chapter. In fact, they are constantly having to erase Mr. Roberts' memory, so that he will not recall all of the strangeness he is observing. All of the wizards have pitched tents in attempts to act like Muggles. Many of the tents have chimneys, or purple fires out front.

After setting up two surprisingly spacious tents, Ron, Harry, and Hermione stroll across the campgrounds to collect a bucket of water from the tap. On their way, they pass several wizard children on tiny broomsticks, a Salem Witches' Institute banner, and a village of tents covered in shamrocks¡Xthe supporters of the Irish national team. They pass then through the Bulgaria tents, which are covered in posters of Viktor Krum, the team's young, magnificent, scowling Seeker. Harry realizes during this time how expansive the wizard world really is.

Upon returning to the tent, they find Mr. Weasley delightedly trying to start a fire with matches. Soon Percy, Bill, and Charlie Apparate in. The group is visited by Ludo Bagman, the Head of Magical Games and Sports, and a retired Quidditch Beater. Ludo is rosy with enthusiasm for the coming game, and he wagers with Fred and George on the outcome. The twins bet all their money that Ireland will win, but that Krum will catch the Snitch. Just as Ludo is complaining about the non-English speaking Bulgarian Minister of Magic, Barty Crouch, Percy's stiff and humorless boss, who is a master of over two hundred languages, Apparates. Percy bows low and offers him tea, and the startled Crouch accepts the tea, but Percy for Weatherby, much to the twins' delight. They allude to a mysterious upcoming event at Hogwarts, and then they leave. Harry buys himself, Ron, and Hermione each a pair of expensive omnioculars from a wizard vender, and they troop to the field to watch the match.

The Weasleys go to their seats in the top box. As they sit down, Harry notices a small bat-eared creature sitting alone. Harry recognizes her instantly as a house-elf, and he finds out that her name is Winky. She is saving a seat for her master, and that she knows Dobby, whom Harry set free two years before. Winky explains that house-elves are supposed to do as they are told without payment, and that Dobby has been requesting payment. Soon Cornelius Fudge, the Minister of Magic, joins them in the top box, as do the Malfoys, the wealthy, arrogant family of Harry's nemesis at Hogwarts.

Ludo Bagman is commentating on the game, and as he begins to speak, the teams send out their mascots. First, Bulgarian Veela, beautiful platinum-haired dancing Sirens enchant the audience males. Then, Irish Leprechauns form shapes in the sky and drop gold pieces onto the bleachers, which Ron collects and uses to repay Harry for the omnioculars. The players enter the field and the game begins. Harry has never seen such a fast game of Quidditch. The players dash madly through the sky, and Ireland is quickly in the lead. Harry uses a pair of Omnioculars that he just bought to watch the moves in slow motion, and to note the names of the various plays etched across the screen. The mascots are growing more involved, to the point that the Veela, angry at the Bulgarian's lagging behind, burst out of their beautiful skins and reveal their true, demonic bird- heads. Krum wows the audience by performing a "Wronksi Feint," a spectacular dive for the Snitch that fools the other team's Seeker into following him and crashing into the ground. Once his team is one hundred and sixty points behind Ireland, he catches the Snitch, ending the game, but in Ireland's favor. The crowds go wild, and Fred and George go to collect their winnings from Ludo Bagman.

After several hours of discussing the game, the two Weasley tents quiet down and sleep. Mr. Weasley awakens Harry and tells him to get outside the tent. He does so, and he see a crowd of masked, hooded wizards marching through camp. He sees Mr. Roberts, his wife, and his kids levitating above them. It is an awful sight, and Harry, Ron, and Hermione run to the woods; there, they find Draco Malfoy leaning against a tree and looking pleased. He explains to them that the crowd is rampaging against Muggles and Mudbloods (an offensive term for wizards who, like Hermione, are born of Muggle parents). The three friends ignore him and suddenly Harry realizes that he cannot find his wand. In this midst of this chaos, they spy Winky the house-elf limping along, squeaking fearfully to herself. Ludo Bagman then appears near them, looks alarmed, and disappears. Moments later, they hear a spell mumbled and see a green smoky skull with a snake in its mouth, arising high in the sky. The woods around them erupt in screams. Suddenly many wands are aimed at Harry, Ron, and Hermione, who duck in time to escape being stupefied.

Mr. Weasley comes to rescue them, but not before Mr. Crouch storms over and asks which of them conjured the Dark Mark. The three explain that they heard a voice summoning it, but Mr. Crouch suspects them. At this point, Mr. Diggory goes into the trees and emerges holding an unconscious Winky in his arms, as well as a wand he found in her hand. Mr. Crouch is horrified and defensive, and Mr. Diggory brings Winky back to consciousness to ask what happened. She says that she did not do it, and Harry notices that the wand she was holding is his. This causes a new wave of suspicion, especially when Mr. Diggory reveals that this wand did in fact summon the Dark Mark. It seems highly unlikely that either Harry Potter or Mr. Crouch's house-elf could or would have conjured the spell, so the frightened group disbands. Hermione is deeply upset to watch Mr. Crouch threatening to fire Winky, and she begins to speak of slavery and elf-rights. As the group returns to their tents, Mr. Weasley reassures the masses that everything is okay, and then he explains to his kids and Harry that Voldemort's followers, the Death Eaters, always made the Dark Mark after killing someone, and as they were the ones levitating the Muggles, they would have been frightened by the Dark Mark into thinking that Voldemort had returned to find that that they had betrayed him, as they had managed to escape being put into Azkaban Prison. Harry is shaken by this knowledge, and he wonders whether it pertains to the pain in his scar three nights before.

The Weasley party goes home early the next morning; Mrs. Weasley is tearful and relieved to see them all alive, after reading about the Dark Mark in the wizarding news. Mr. Weasley heads to the Ministry to clear up rumors written by the reporter Rita Skeeter in the article, and Harry confides to Ron and Hermione about his scar hurting; they react just as he predicted they would. For the following week, Percy and Mr. Weasley spend all of their time at the Ministry of Magic, while Harry, Hermione, and the Weasley kids prepare their school things to return to Hogwarts. They learn from Bill about Rita Skeeter's reputation for ruining wizard reputations in her news articles. The night before they leave for school, Mrs. Weasley brings to the kids an armful of laundered dress robes, and Ron throws a fit at the fact that his are second-hand and lacy, and Mrs. Weasley leaves the room defeated. Harry feels deeply sorry for Ron about financial matters, because Harry's parents left him a small fortune, and the Weasleys are always struggling to make ends meet.

It is raining hard the following morning, and the Weasleys, Harry, and Hermione wake up to find Amos Diggory's head in the fireplace. Amos reports that Mad-Eye Moody set his dustbins to attack what he thought was an intruder, and has been caught by Muggle policemen. Mad-Eye Moody once was a great Auror (dark wizard catcher), but now he has grown old and suspicious. Mr. Weasley speeds off to the Ministry to sort this out, while everyone else loads into the three Muggle taxicabs that will take them to King's Cross Station. The Hogwarts students enter platform nine and three-quarters and board the Hogwarts Express. Charlie hints that he may be seeing them sooner than they think.

On the train, Harry, Ron and Hermione overhear Draco Malfoy boasting to his friends that his father wanted to send him to Durmstrang, a wizard school in Northern Europe that teaches the Dark Arts. The three then lapse into a discussion about various other European wizard schools. The three friends reunite with other students, such as Dean Thomas, Seamus Finnigan, and Neville Longbottom, who lives with his grandmother and was the only one who did not attend the World Cup. Ron has draped his new dress robe over Pig's owl cage, and Malfoy saunters by, spies it, picks on Ron for a bit, and mentions something mysterious that is soon to happen at Hogwarts. Finally, they arrive at Hogwarts and are taken to the castle in a row of horseless carriages, while the first-year students cross the lake in boats with Hagrid.

Once the students enter the castle, they are bombarded with water-balloons by Peeves, the annoying Hogwarts poltergeist. Drenched, they all file into the Great Hall for dinner, where they sit at tables with their respective Houses. Harry is greeted by Nearly-Headless Nick, the friendly Gryffindor House ghost, while he waits for the Sorting to begin and wonders who the new defense against the dark arts teacher will be. As soon as the first-years enter the hall, Professor McGonagall places a dilapidated hat on a stool, and promptly the hat sings a song and, when placed on the head of each first-year, calls out the name of the appropriate house where he or she would live. Dennis Creevey, the younger brother of Colin Creevey, a third-year who idolizes Harry, is Sorted into Gryffindor, and he gawks at the scar on Harry's forehead.

Dinner appears on the tables, and as the students eat, Nearly Headless Nick mentions that Peeves has caused problems with the house-elves in the kitchen. Hermione stares at him, proclaims that Hogwarts is engaging in slave-labor, and refuses to finish her dinner. Soon the headmaster, Dumbledore, rises to address the school. He tells them that the annual Quidditch Cup will not take place this year; before he can tell them what will take its place, he is interrupted by the entrance of a gnarled, grumpy looking man with one large swiveling eye: Mad-Eye Moody, who is the school's new Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher. The students stare silently as Dumbledore introduces him, and they listen in anticipation as Dumbledore proceeds to explain that the Triwizard Tournament, a competition between representatives from each of the three largest European schools of wizardry (Hogwarts, Beauxbatons, and Durmstrang), will take place this year at Hogwarts. It had been discontinued hundreds of years ago because of high death tolls, but the Ministry of Magic has now taken enough precautions for it to continue. He adds that the winner will receive a thousand galleons, and that nobody younger than seventeen years old can enter. The Weasley twins scoff, and that night as Harry falls asleep in his dorm room, he imagines himself entering and winning the Triwizard Tournament. He imagines Cho Chang, a Ravenclaw girl on whom he has a crush, cheering for him.

The students begin classes. First is Herbology, during which Professor Sprout teaches the Gryffindors and Hufflepuffs how to collect Bubotuber pus. In Care of Magical Creatures with Hagrid, the Gryffindors and Slytherins are introduced to newly hatched Blast-Ended Skrewts, strange lobster-like creatures that bite, sting, and propel themselves by blasting from one end. Hagrid explains the differences between the male and female Skrewts. Nobody can tell where their mouths are or how to feed them, or what purpose there is in keeping them alive. Draco Malfoy complains sullenly, as usual, and Harry does his best to seem interested, so that Hagrid will feel good about his class. After lunch, which Hermione is eating once again, she dashes away to the library. Harry and Ron trek to Divination class, where the airy, cryptic Professor Trelawney predicts that whatever Harry fears will happen soon. She shows the class how to read the planets by using Harry as an example, whom she says must have been born in midwinter, because of his coloring and tragic past. He informs her that his birthday is in July. She grows annoyed that nobody takes her class seriously and assigns them a month's worth of personal predictions on the planetary alignments.

As the students enter the Great Hall for dinner, Malfoy reads aloud from an article written by Rita Skeeter, ridiculing Mr. Weasley for helping Mad-Eye Moody out of his tangle with the policemen several days before. Malfoy proceeds to insult Ron's parents, and Harry defends Ron by noting that Malfoy's mother had a perpetually unpleasant expression on her face. Harry turns around to leave, and Malfoy attacks him, the sparks of his wand just missing Harry. At this moment, Mad-Eye Moody enters the scene, swiftly turning Malfoy into a ferret and causing him to bounce in the hallway, as punishment for attacking when his opponent's back was turned. Professor McGonagall transforms Malfoy into his original form and warns Moody not to transfigure students. At dinner, the Weasley twins speak in awe of Moody's teaching abilities in defense against the dark arts.

The morning after hearing from Sirius, Harry wakes early and tiptoes to the Owlry, where he sends a letter to Sirius, disclaiming his scar pain and telling him to stay where he is. Days pass with no response, and in defense against the dark arts, Professor Moody places the Imperius Curse on the students in order to teach them to ward it off. The students do strange things under Moody's control, and when it is his turn, Harry feels the loveliest, most unconcerned feeling. He hears Moody order him to jump on the table. Harry prepares to jump, but then considers why he should do what Moody is telling him, and so he crashes into the table while deciding whether to jump or not. Moody is delighted.

Classes get busier. Near the end of October, a poster informs the students that the delegations from Beauxbatons and Durmstrang will be arriving on October 30 in the evening. A Hufflepuff boy reads the sign and says that he should alert Cedric Diggory. Hermione and Ron argue about whether Cedric is intelligent or not. Hermione believes he is, and Ron accuses Hermione of liking Cedric only because he is handsome. Hermione continues with S.P.E.W., which most people think is a great joke, and Harry receives word from Sirius that he is indeed coming and will stay well hidden.

On the 30th, the Hogwarts students line up to welcome the guests. Beauxbatons arrives in a great flying carriage, and from the carriage emerges the Headmistress, Madame Maxime, an oversized and attractive woman who greets Dumbledore and then leads her underdressed, shivering students into the castle to warm up. Soon from the lake emerges a great ghostly ship, from which the Durmstrang students, led by the shifty, shrewd-looking Karkaroff, file onto dry land. One of these students, Ron gasps in amazement, is the Bulgarian Seeker, Viktor Krum.

As the guest schools file into the Great Hall, the Hogwarts girls are in a great fluster to get Viktor Krum's autograph, just as the boys are fighting to have him sit near them. He winds up sitting at the Slytherin table, but throughout dinner Ron considers offering him a space to sleep in his and Harry's room. The Beauxbatons students scowl and complain, even after an eclectic mix of dishes (to accommodate the nationality of each school) appears on the table. Ron becomes fixated on one of the Beauxbatons girls, whom he thinks looks like a Veela. Hermione is annoyed, but Harry is barely paying attention, as he is busy admiring Cho Chang, a pretty Ravenclaw girl. At the head table, Ludo Bagman and Barty Crouch have arrived to help judge.

Dumbledore introduces the Goblet of Fire to the students and explains that those who wish to enter the Tournament should place their name on a slip of paper inside the goblet; he adds that he has drawn an age line around its perimeter, meaning that no one under the age of seventeen can approach. Dinner ends. As Karkaroff is fawning over Krum and leading the Durmstrang students back to their ship, he notices Harry and stares. Moody approaches and angrily tells Karkaroff not to hold up the line.

The next day, Fred and George use a potion to age themselves, but still the Age Line throws them away, causing them to sprout beards. Everybody is curious to see who enters, and who is selected to compete. That afternoon, Harry, Ron, and Hermione slip over to visit Hagrid, and they are shocked to find that he has dressed in a hairy brown suit, slicked back his hair, and put on some sort of awful-smelling cologne. They all discuss the Tournament and the Skrewts, which have grown and begun to kill each other; Hermione fails in her attempt to persuade Hagrid to join S.P.E.W., and as they all begin to move back toward the castle, Hagrid is distracted by Madame Maxime.

Upon hearing Dumbledore announce his name, Harry is stunned; he moves slowly to the room with the other champions, feeling shocked and confused. In the back room, Cedric, Krum, and Fleur are waiting quietly, and before Harry can say anything, a hoard of teachers and judges follows him and begins speaking all at once. Ludo Bagman seems delighted about Harry's being one of the champions. Madame Maxime and Karkaroff angrily suspect that the contest has been rigged; Dumbledore is stern, but believes Harry when he says that he didn't put his name in the Goblet. Snape is certain that Harry managed somehow to cheat. Moody enters in the middle of all the chaos, and begins speculating morbidly. He reminds everyone what being chosen by the Goblet represents an unbreakable contract; he says that someone put Harry's name in the Goblet knowing that he would have to compete, perhaps in the hope that Harry would die doing so. Moody continues by saying that only a very strong charm could confuse the Goblet into accepting a submission from a fourth school, which someone must have done when entering Harry's name. Karkaroff takes this moment to accuse Moody of having done it, since he seems to know exactly how to do it; Moody responds belligerently by saying that he needed to think as Dark wizards do, as Karkaroff ought to remember. Dumbledore interrupts and ends the argument.

Mr. Crouch explains briefly that the contest will consist of three surprise tasks beginning in late November, and that the first task is designed to test the students' daring. Harry and Cedric return to their respective houses, and Cedric, though he acts diplomatically, clearly doesn't believe Harry when he claims not to have submitted his name to the Goblet. In the Gryffindor common room, everybody is celebrating Harry as the Hogwarts champion; Harry does not feel like celebrating, and when he finally returns to his dorm room, he finds Ron, who is sullen that Harry found a secret way to enter and didn't invite Ron to join him. Harry is thunderstruck that Ron, of all people, doesn't believe him.

The next morning, Harry is met by Hermione, who brings him toast and takes him for a walk. She believes that he didn't put his name in the goblet, and she explains that Ron would believe it too, but that he is jealous of all the attention Harry always gets. Harry is indignant, as he usually resents the attention and cannot imagine why Ron would envy it. He then writes a letter, updating Sirius on the previous night's events. Classes resume. Although Hagrid believes Harry, most people do not; students from all houses except Gryffindor scowl at Harry in the corridors, believing that he entered in hope of attracting even more attention. Harry is stressed, lonely without Ron, and doing very poorly in his classes.

In Potions class, all the Slytherins wear light-up badges that say, "Support Cedric Diggory-the REAL Hogwarts Champion!" When pressed, the badges chirp, "Potter Stinks!" Malfoy, after tiring of insulting Harry, decides to turn on Hermione, and Harry explodes, casting a mild disfiguring curse on Malfoy, just as Malfoy does the same to Harry; the curses miss and hit Goyle and Hermione instead, and instantly Hermione's already-large teeth begin to grow down past her chin. Snape sends Goyle to the hospital wing but dismisses Hermione's wound, saying that she looks the same. She flees in tears, and Ron and Harry both turn angrily on Snape, receiving detentions in the process. Potions class is interrupted by Colin Creevey, who takes Harry out of class and to the weighing of the champions' wands.

Before the weighing begins, Rita Skeeter, a brash middle-aged reporter, pulls Harry into a broom closet and begins firing questions at him. He doesn't answer them, and still her Quick-Quotes Quill manages to sketch out a tragic portrait of him before Dumbledore enters the closet and rescues Harry. The weighing is done by Mr. Ollivander, who sold Harry his wand. Fleur's wand contains a hair of her grandmother, a Veela; Cedric's contains a unicorn tail- hair. Krum's contains a dragon heartstring, and Harry's contains, although Mr. Ollivander tactfully refrains from mentioning it aloud, a feather from the phoenix whose other feather resides in Voldemort's wand. Photographs follow, and Rita Skeeter manages to push Harry up towards the front. Finally, that evening, Harry receives a request to be in the Gryffindor Common room alone at one in the morning on November 22, just two days before the first task.

Life is moving along slowly for Harry these days: his first task is nearing, Ron refuses to speak to him, and to top it off, Rita Skeeter published an article about the Triwizard Champions in which she left out Cedric entirely and spent four pages expounding on Harry's tragic past, attributing quotes to him about crying at night about his parents' death, and noting that he is in love with Hermione. Harry is horrified, and is taunted endlessly. He spends most of his time in the library with Hermione, who is profoundly bothered that Viktor Krum has taken to studying there, drawing along with him a gaggle of admirers. During a Hogsmeade visit, Harry wears his Invisibility Cloak in hope of attaining some anonymity, but Mad-Eye Moody spies him through it and points him out to Hagrid, who tells him to come to his cabin that night at midnight. Harry does as he is told. Invisibly, he follows Hagrid, who escorts Madame Maxime deep into the Forbidden Forest, where several dozen men, including Charlie Weasley, are trying to subdue four dragons. Harry overhears Charlie tell Hagrid that each dragon is a nesting mother, and that the four champions are to get past the dragons as their first task-he notes that one of them, a Hungarian Horntail, is significantly more dangerous than the rest.

Harry dashes off to meet Sirius in the common room at one, and he trips over Karkaroff, who is walking speedily through the woods, presumably in attempt to investigate the first task for himself. Right on time, Sirius's head is sitting in the Gryffindor fireplace. Harry tells him everything, and in return Sirius warns Harry that Karkaroff had been a Death-Eater who ultimately was caught by Moody. Sirius says that Moody was the best Auror in history, and is now at Hogwarts for a reason. Furthermore, he suggests that the fiasco with the dustbins may actually have been legitimate; someone may have tried to stop Moody from coming to Hogwarts. Lastly, Sirius notes that Bertha Jorkins was last seen in Albania, oddly enough, where Voldemort was last sighted; he may have used her for information and disposed of her. Before Sirius can advise Harry on how to get past a dragon, Ron walks into the common room, and Sirius disappears in the flames. Harry is furious at this interruption and throws a "Potter Stinks" badge at Ron's face before charging up to bed.

As the first task nears, Harry and Hermione research ways to subdue dragons, but to no avail; Harry is terrified and considers leaving Hogwarts, but decides against it when faced with the alternative of returning to the Dursleys. The day before the task, Harry warns Cedric about the dragons, since the other champions must have heard from their school-heads by now. Cedric is suspicious, and Moody pulls Harry aside afterwards and commends his decency in evening out the field. Then he advises Harry to play to his strengths, nodding when Harry muses aloud "Quidditch." Harry realizes through this conversation that he must fly past the dragon, and therefore he must have his Firebolt broomstick. He and Hermione spend the rest of the day and night practicing the summoning charm, "Accio!"

The morning of the task, the four nervous champions are led into a tent in the forest, allowed to pluck from a bag a model of the dragon they are to fight, and told that their goal is to get the golden egg. Harry is to go fourth and fight the Hungarian Horntail. He listens as the crowd reacts to the work of the other three champions, and when his turn comes, he walks into the enclosure, summons his broomstick, and flies around the dragon, feeling at ease for the first time in the whole tournament, and getting the egg in what Ron afterwards tells him was the best and fastest of the four methods. All of the champions got the egg eventually, but Cedric and Fleur were charred a bit, and Krum causes his dragon to step on several of her real eggs. Ron and Harry are reunited afterwards, as Ron was terrified for Harry's life and realized that Harry would never put himself in that position just for attention. The champions are told that their golden eggs will clue them in on the second task, which will take place in three months. Harry is relieved and happy as he walks back toward the castle with Ron.

Harry sends a letter to Sirius describing the triumph over the dragon. He goes into the Gryffindor common room, where a great celebration ensues. At one point, Harry is persuaded to open his golden egg, but only a garbled shrieking comes from it. Everyone is merry, especially Fred and George, whose Canary Creams turn Neville temporarily into a giant yellow canary. Harry goes to sleep feeling grand.

Days later, while Harry is helping Hagrid tie up ten angry Skrewts, Rita Skeeter drops in and asks to interview Hagrid. She beams at Harry, who does his best to ignore her. Divination is fun again, now that Harry and Ron are friends again. After class, Hermione drags the boys down to the kitchens, where, amid a hundreds of house-elves offering food and tea, Dobby appears and greets Harry. He and Winky now work at Hogwarts, and although Dobby is delighted by his freedom and his ability to earn money for his work, Winky is not; she misses Mr. Crouch and feels disgraced. Dobby, now that he is free from the Malfoys, confides in Harry that the Malfoys are dark wizards; Winky weeps sloppily and refuses to speak ill of Mr. Crouch, although she does mention that Ludo Bagman is a bad wizard. As the students leave the kitchens, Dobby promises to visit Harry, and Hermione feels confident that the other house-elves will soon envy Dobby's freedom and demand better standards for themselves.

During Transformation class, Professor McGonagall announces that the Yule Ball is fast approaching, and that the Champions and their dates will need to open the floor for dancing. This means that Harry must find a date. He would rather face a Hungarian Horntail. Several girls ask Harry, but he declines each one. He wants to go with Cho, but as she is always surrounded by giggling girls, he postpones asking her.

During class, Harry finds out that Hagrid's interview with Rita Skeeter consists mostly of her asking him questions about Harry. Most classes at this point have relaxed quite a bit, as the teachers move into holiday spirit. Only Hermione is still intent on working hard, and she encourages Harry to spend some time figuring out his egg clue. He says lazily that he has loads of time. Meanwhile, everyone around them is getting dates; Ron comments that if he and Harry wait much longer, they'll wind up going with a pair of trolls. Hermione is offended and leaves the common room.

The castle is decorated for Christmas, with singing suits of armor, icicles hanging from the staircase, and twelve trees in the Great Hall; everything is ready for the Yule Ball except for Harry and Ron. Finally Harry asks Cho, who answers very apologetically that she just agreed to go with Cedric. Meanwhile, Ron has asked Fleur, who simply ignores his question. Defeated, the boys sit in the Gryffindor common room racking their brains for dates; Hermione enters the room, and Ron spouts out, "you are a girl ¡K you can come with one of us!" Hermione snaps that she already has a partner, and that other people noticed that she was a girl significantly before Ron did. She does not tell them who her date is, nor will Ginny Weasley, who is also in the common room and has agreed to go with Neville. Finally, Parvati Patil, a pretty but annoying Gryffindor girl enters the common room; she agrees to go as Harry's date, and to set her twin sister up as Ron's.

As the Yule Ball approaches, students grow more and more antsy. After Malfoy insults Hermione's teeth one evening, Harry notices that her teeth look smaller; she confides that when Madame Pomfrey was shrinking the curse teeth in the hospital wing, Hermione allowed her to make them slightly smaller than they originally were.

On Christmas day, Harry is jolted awake by Dobby, who has crept into his room to give him a gift of homemade socks. The students open their presents, loaf through the morning, and have an elaborate snowball fight, which Hermione leaves early in order to prepare for the ball. At the ball, Harry and Parvati are seated at the head table with the other champions, including Cedric and Cho, as well as Krum and a beautiful girl who turns out to be Hermione. Ron, who has annoyed his date by staring glumly at Hermione all night, accuses Hermione of fraternizing with the enemy.

Percy Weasley attends the ball in place of Mr. Crouch, who is ill; and Harry and Ron ditch their already annoyed dates and rush outside to avoid listening to Percy. On their walk, they overhear Snape and Karkaroff deep in some mysterious discussion, and then they find Fleur in a rosebush, passionately involved with her date. Finally, Harry and Ron overhear Hagrid confide in Madame Maxime that he is half-giant, like her. She yelps at this accusation and leaves, insulted. As he accidentally overhears, Harry tries to focus on a small black beetle that is flying around them. They return to the dance, which is not much fun, and as they leave, Cedric quietly advises Harry to listen to his egg while taking a bath; he offers the Prefect's bathroom for this purpose. Harry enters the Gryffindor common room to find Ron and Hermione in a heated fight, which ends with Hermione shouting, "Next time there's a ball, ask me before someone else does, and not as a last resort!"

When Harry informs Hermione that Hagrid is half-giant, she is unconcerned, claiming that the hysteria about giants is a dumb prejudice. Her relationship with Ron is tense at this point. In Care of Magical Creatures, Hagrid is absent, and in his place is Professor Grubbly-Plank, who introduces the girls in the class to a unicorn. The boys shuffle around uselessly during the lesson, and Malfoy shows Harry and Ron the newest article by Rita Skeeter, which reveals that Hagrid is a half-giant, the son of the giantess Fridwulfa. Fridwulfa was quite dangerous, and Skeeter says that Hagrid is a fearsome, irresponsible teacher. Harry, Ron, and ultimately Hermione are furious, and although they bang on Hagrid's door, he does not answer.

During the next Hogsmeade visit, Ludo Bagman, who is sitting in a corner of the Three Broomsticks pub with a hoard of vicious-looking goblins, offers Harry assistance with his egg, which Harry turns down. Bagman confides in Harry that Mr. Crouch has stopped coming to work entirely. Then Rita Skeeter appears in the pub, chatting about an article in which she is planning to destroy Bagman's reputation. Hermione, Harry, and Ron turn on her furiously for the article about Hagrid, and she angrily snaps at Hermione to stay out of it. She leaves, and Harry has a sinking feeling that Hermione is next on Rita's attack list. The three friends run from the pub to Hagrid's house, where they find Dumbledore consoling him. They beg Hagrid to return to teach, and he tearfully agrees; he then asks how Harry is coming along with his egg, and Harry knows that it is time to take Cedric's suggestion, wary as he is of Cedric after seeing that he is now paired off with Cho.
That night, Harry gathers the golden egg and the Marauder's Map, and in his Invisibility cloak, he sneaks into the prefects' bathroom. It is extraordinary: there are piles of fluffy towels, walls of white marble (one of which holds a painting of a beautiful, sleeping mermaid), and a swimming-pool sized tub with hundreds of jeweled taps that spurt out various kinds of bubbles. As soon as Harry has undressed and gotten into the water, he is joined by Moaning Myrtle, who suggests that he listen to the egg underwater. He does this, and he hears a song telling him to find something he has lot underwater. He deduces that he must reclaim something from the mer-people in the lake. As he thanks Myrtle and returns invisibly to his room, he notices on the map that Bartemius Crouch is inside Snape office. In surprise, Harry steps on the trick stair, getting his foot stuck and dropping both the egg and the map.

Filch appears and grabs the open and scratchily singing egg, thinking it is some doing of Peeves. Soon Snape appears and accuses someone of having been in his office. Before anything else can happen, Moody arrives, and his mad eye is clearly able to see Harry under his cloak. Moody figures out what is happening and he takes the map and the egg, and he sends the other two observers off to bed. Then he asks Harry, who has removed his cloak, whom the map showed in Snape's office, and Harry replies that it is Mr. Crouch. Moody seems alarmed, mentions that odd things have been going on lately, and asks if he can borrow the map, which Harry agrees to let him do. As they head up to bed, Moody says that Harry is a sharp boy, and tells him to consider a profession as an Auror.

The next day in class, Harry confides everything to Ron and Hermione. They speculate on whether Moody or Mr. Crouch has been hired to keep an eye on Karkaroff and Snape. That night, Harry sends a letter to Sirius, updating him; he responds, wanting to know the date of the next Hogsmeade visit. Harry writes back, telling him when. Harry, Ron, and Hermione do not know how Harry can survive for an hour underwater. Hagrid returns to teaching, and he seems deeply confident that Harry will win the tournament.

The evening before the second task, Harry spends the night in the library, poring through books that could offer help; he is alone, because Ron and Hermione have been mysteriously summoned away to Professor McGonagall. Harry drifts into sleep and is awakened ten minutes before the second task by Dobby, who offers him a ball of something called gillyweed, which supposedly will allow him to breathe underwater. Having no other alternative, Harry runs down to the lake, eats the gillyweed, and dives into the water with the other three champions.

Harry grows gills, and can swim quite easily. At the bottom of the lake he finds the village of the mer-people, and he sees Ron, Hermione, Cho, and a girl who must be Fleur's younger sister, all asleep and tied together. Harry uses a rock to free Ron, and he waits to see if the others will be rescued. Cedric eventually comes for Cho, and Krum for Hermione, but Fleur never arrives. So Harry fends off the ugly, broken-toothed, oddly-colored, aggressive mer-people with his wand, and carries both Ron and Fleur's sister to the water's surface. He is the last to arrive, and he feels foolish for waiting around underwater when he could have come up first. A mermaid swims to the surface and informs Dumbledore that Harry was the first to arrive, but waited to make sure all four hostages were rescued, so Harry receives very high marks from the judges on his completion of the second task. Fleur is grateful and kisses both Ron and Harry. Hermione is so preoccupied with Harry that she ignores Krum as he plucks a water-beetle from her hair. Harry is immensely grateful to Dobby, and plans to buy him pairs and pairs of socks.

In the aftermath of the second task, Ron becomes a hero, and Harry receives an invitation to meet Sirius in Hogsmeade the coming weekend. In Potions class, the Slytherins are giggling over Rita Skeeter's "Witch Weekly" article, which says that Hermione is toying with the famous hearts of both Harry Potter and Viktor Krum. While Hermione laughs, she also wonders how Rita could have gotten some of the details she mentioned, including Krum's invitation to visit him in Bulgaria over the summer. Snape separates the three friends as punishment for speaking in class, and from Harry's new seat at the front of the room, he overhears a dialogue between Snape and Karkaroff, who interrupts the class. Karkaroff seems frightened at the appearance of something on his upper arm-but Snape shoos Harry away before he can hear more.

At Hogsmeade, Sirius meets them disguised as Padfoot, his animagus dog form. They trot off to a nearby cave where Sirius has been hiding and living off rats. After a debate as to whether Winky or Bagman was more likely to have conjured the Dark Mark at the World Cup, Sirius confides in the students that Mr. Crouch was ruthless in his crusade against Voldemort, and he was chosen as the next Minister of Magic as a result. However, his own son was convicted as a Death-Eater, given a short trial, and imprisoned in Azkaban, where he soon died. Sirius adds that Mr. Crouch lost everything then, and perhaps hoped now that if he caught another Dark wizard, he could set his career back on track. Sirius seems puzzled about the fact that Mr. Crouch had his elf save him a seat at the World Cup but never showed up to take it. Sirius finally suggests that Ron write to Percy to try to find out more information about his boss. The students part ways with him.

The following morning, Harry, Ron, and Hermione send an inquiring owl message to Percy, and afterwards visit the kitchens to give Dobby several new pairs of socks as thanks for the gillyweed. Dobby is ecstatic, and all of the house-elves are delighted to see and serve them, except for Winky, who is sitting in a corner, filthy, miserable, and drunk from Butterbeer. In a few garbled sentences, she says that her master needs her to help protect his deepest secret. The other elves are embarrassed about Winky's behavior. Hermione is upset and wants Winky's misery to me ameliorated, not ignored. Before they leave, they procure from the elves some food to send to Sirius.

Hermione is receiving hate letters for supposedly breaking Harry's heart, and Hagrid is busy teaching the students how to use nifflers, animals that dig for gold. Ron collects the most Leprechaun gold, and upon realizing that it disappears, asks why Harry didn't mention that Ron owed him for the Omnioculars. Ron is feeling embarrassed about being poor, and Hermione is upset about being persecuted for what Rita wrote. They discuss how she could have overheard the conversations she writes, and Harry suggests that she has somebody bugged. This is impossible within Hogwarts, so Hermione continues to brainstorm.

One evening after Easter, the champions are called down to the fields to hear about their next task, which will be a maze and obstacle course with the Triwizard Cup at the center. On the way back toward the castle, Krum pulls Harry aside into the Forbidden Forest and asks if he and Hermione are romantically involved. Harry tells they aren't, and Krum seems relieved. At that moment, a shabby, ill-looking Mr. Crouch appears in the forest, talking to himself, to trees, and to Harry with an insane sort of desperation, saying in garbled phrases that Bertha Jorkins was his fault, that the Dark Lord was getting stronger, and that he had to see Dumbledore. Harry leaves him with Krum and runs to fetch Dumbledore, but when he and Dumbledore arrive in the forest, they find Krum stunned and Mr. Crouch gone. Hagrid and Moody arrive, followed by Karkaroff, who accuses Dumbledore of treachery, infuriating Hagrid. Harry is sent back to his dorm under Hagrid's supervision and told to remain there all night. Hagrid warns him gravely about associating with foreigners, such as Krum.

At daybreak the morning after Mr. Crouch attacked Krum, Harry, Ron, and Hermione are at the Owlery, sending an update to Sirius and discussing possible and unlikely explanations for the strange events of the evening. Fred and George enter the Owlery discussing blackmail and preparing to send a letter, and the five students regard each other warily; ultimately none of them reveal their purpose. Later that morning, Harry, Ron, and Hermione visit Professor Moody, who reports that Mr. Crouch did not show up on the Marauder's Map-very odd indeed, as he did not seem in the sort of state where he could have escaped the premises quickly. Moody warns Harry to be especially careful; soon after, Harry receives a letter back from Sirius, also warning him to be especially careful, as somebody who is obviously very dangerous is at Hogwarts and may be after Harry. Sirius warns him further to prepare well for the third task, which he does, with the help of his friends.

Several days later, in Divination class, Harry falls asleep to the heat and to the droning of an insect, and he dreams of flying on an owl into a house, inside of which Voldemort is reprimanding Wormtail for having made some mistake, noting that some unnamed "he" is dead, and foretelling that soon he would have Harry Potter dead and ready to be fed to his pet snake. Voldemort then applies the Cruciatus curse to Wormtail, causing Harry to wake up screaming and clutching his scar. Harry leaves the room and charges towards Dumbledore's office, where he can hear Cornelius Fudge and Moody arguing with Dumbledore. Moody sees Harry through the door and announces his arrival.

Harry waits in Dumbledore's room while the three adults examine the grounds for clues; as he waits, he observes Fawkes, Dumbledore's pet phoenix, and he also notices in a half-open cupboard a basin containing something silvery and swirling. Harry studies it, pokes it with his wand and looks closer, ultimately touching his nose to it and falling in; he lands in a courtroom, where he is an unseen observer among a grave audience (including a slightly younger Dumbledore and Moody). Harry watches as Karkaroff is strapped into a chair at the room's center and questioned by Mr. Crouch, who has agreed to set him free from Azkaban in exchange for the names of other Death-Eaters. Karkaroff gives many names, including Snape-but Dumbledore stands up and vouches for Snape, who had left Voldemort and agreed to work as a spy for the good side. Suddenly the room dissolves, and Ludo Bagman is sitting in the same chair, pleading that he didn't realize that he was working for Voldemort's supporters. The audience votes to forgive him, presumably due to their admiration of his Quidditch abilities. The room dissolves a third time and reveals Mr. Crouch's son in the center of the room, pleading to be let go, while his strict father accuses him of many awful things, including subjecting the Longbottoms to the Cruciatus curse. Mr. Crouch's wife is weeping in the audience as Mr. Crouch sentences his only son to a lifetime in Azkaban.

Dumbledore pulls Harry out of the room and back into his office, where he explains that the basin is a Pensieve, a holder for excess thoughts and memories. He does not seem at all upset that Harry was poking around in his office. Harry tells Dumbledore about his dream, and Dumbledore expresses his belief that the dream is probably true, that Voldemort is near and dangerous, and that the three recent disappearances of Bertha Jorkins, Mr. Crouch, and a Muggle named Frank Bryce, may be traceable to Voldemort. Harry considers this, then asks whether the Longbottoms mentioned were Neville's parents. Dumbledore replies bitterly that they are, and says that they were very popular Aurors who went insane after being subjected to the curse, which is why Neville lives with his grandmother. Harry asks also whether Bagman or Snape has been convicted of any Dark activity since that time. Dumbledore answers, with conviction, that neither has, before bidding Harry goodbye and good luck on the third task.

Harry tells Ron and Hermione everything he has seen in the Pensieve (leaving out the part about Neville's parents), and they discuss it at great length. In addition, they spend a great deal of time in empty classrooms, helping Harry practice hexes. On the morning of the third task, Rita Skeeter writes an article describing how Harry fainted in class and is possibly disturbed and dangerous, and the students read it over breakfast. Harry wonders how Rita could have overheard what happened in Divination, and suddenly Hermione jumps up and runs to the library, saying that she has figured something out. After breakfast, the families of the champions arrive at Hogwarts to watch the final task, and Bill and Mrs. Weasley come to watch Harry; they stroll the grounds all afternoon, and at dusk, the champions are placed at the entrances to a giant hedge maze, at the center of which the winner would find the trophy.

Harry and Cedric are currently tied for first place, so they go first into the maze, followed by Krum and Fleur. Harry's path is remarkably quiet. He runs into a boggart disguised as a dementor, which he passes easily, and at one point he runs through a mist that temporarily turns the world upside down. He hears Fleur scream, and as he runs forward, he encounters one of Hagrid's Skrewts, which is ten feet long and aggressive. Harry passes the Skrewt. He hears Krum mutter, "Crucio", and hears Cedric scream. Harry burns a hole in the hedge and saves Cedric by stupefying Krum. The two Hogwarts boys continue, shaken, through the maze. Harry passes a sphinx, answers her riddle, and sees the Triwizard Cup ahead. He and Cedric both run for it. They are barred by a giant spider, which together they defeat. Harry breaks his leg in the process. Unable to decide who should have the trophy, since they both helped each other out numerous times throughout the tournament, they decide to touch it at the same time, both winning. They do, and the Cup, it turns out, is a portkey.

Harry and Cedric land in an eerie graveyard far away from Hogwarts. Coming towards them, they see a hooded man carrying what looks like a baby. Suddenly, Harry's scar sears with pain, as he hears a cold voice say, "Kill the spare." The voice is followed by a second, which says, "Avada Kedavra." Cedric is killed instantly. As Harry stares at Cedric, horrified, the hooded man ties Harry tightly to a tombstone of a man named Tom Riddle. Harry recognizes the man in the hood as Wormtail. Harry watches as Wormtail boils water in a giant cauldron, unwraps the bundled object (which is scaly, red, and has a flat snakelike face) and drops it into the cauldron. Harry hopes silently that it will drown.

Wormtail begins speaking. He summons dust from Tom Riddle's grave to renew his son. Wormtail says "Flesh of the servant," and slices off his right hand, dropping it into the cauldron. Finally, he draws blood from Harry's upper arm, adding "Blood of the enemy" to the cauldron. From the cauldron's simmering depths, a tall, thin man rises. Harry knows that Lord Voldemort has risen again.

Harry watches as Voldemort examines his new body, and presses a red tattoo-the Dark Mark-on the weeping Wormtail's upper arm. Voldemort paces the graveyard, musing aloud to Harry about how he killed his Muggle father, who left his witch mother before he was born, leaving him in an orphanage when his mother died giving birth. As he speaks, wizards begin Apparating in a circle around him, each of them hooded and masked. Voldemort welcomes his Death Eaters and notes that they seem, as a group, guilty for having betrayed him when he needed them. One of the men throws himself at Voldemort's feet, begging forgiveness, and Voldemort laughs mirthlessly and performs the Cruciatus curse on him. Voldemort then publicly rewards Wormtail for returning by giving him a new right hand. One of the Death Eaters, Harry notes, is Lucius Malfoy, Draco's father. Voldemort promises the group that he soon will call Azkaban's dementors, his natural allies, into his confidence, as well as the prisoners in Azkaban who once loyally followed him. Voldemort notes that many Death Eaters are missing, either dead, imprisoned, or having fled out of fear. He says that one of the missing people, his most faithful servant, is at Hogwarts, and through that servant's efforts, Harry Potter has been brought here tonight.

Voldemort then discloses his history since he last encountered his Death Eaters. He attempted to kill Harry and he failed, due to the old magic of sacrifice. Harry's mother died to protect Harry, causing the curse to rebound. This ripped Voldemort from his body, and forced him to flee to a faraway forest where he inhabited the bodies of snakes to stay alive. Then, four years ago a foolish future Hogwarts teacher (Quirrell) wandered across his path. Voldemort inhabited his body in order to come to Hogwarts pursue the Sorcerer's Stone, where he was thwarted by Harry Potter. Voldemort was alone and weak when his servant Wormtail returned to him, bringing with him Bertha Jorkins, who informed him of a faithful Death Eater who would be able to help him. He killed her, and with Wormtail's help he used her information to find the faithful servant, and ultimately to bring Harry Potter to him to ensure his rebirth-he adds that Harry's blood was more potent than any blood, since Harry's mother's protection could now reside in Voldemort's veins. He turns to Harry and says "Crucio!" placing Harry in more pain than he has ever felt before. Then he commands Wormtail to untie Harry and give him back his wand.

Harry feels his injured leg crumple under him as he stands up, wand in hand. Voldemort challenges Harry to a duel, and Harry thinks fretfully that the only dueling spell he knows how to do is "Expelliarmus," which disarms the opponent. Voldemort places Harry again under the Cruciatus curse, hurting him terribly. When he stops and asks whether Harry wants him to do that again, Harry refuses to appease him by answering "No." Voldemort places Harry under the Imperius curse, and commands Harry to say no. Harry has learned to fight this curse, and still refuses. Voldemort is furious. Harry, after ducking behind a gravestone to dodge the Cruciatus curse again, stands up straight and tall to die fighting, like his parents and Cedric did. As Voldemort cries "Avada Kedavra," Harry cries "Expelliarmus," and the light from the two wands meet in midair, lifting both Harry and Voldemort into a golden, dome-shaped web of light. Harry hears the beautiful sound of phoenix music whispering to him not to break the connection. Harry's hands are weak and shaky from holding his wand. He watches a bead of light traveling across the thread connecting him to Voldemort. He concentrates to force the bead toward Voldemort's wand and away from his.

When the bead touches the tip of Voldemort's wand, an incredible thing happens. A shadow of a hand blossoms out of the tip of the wand, followed by a shade of Cedric, then an old Muggle (Frank Bryce), then Bertha Jorkins, then Harry's parents. They crowd around him, each of them telling him to hold on, and finally his mother tells him quietly that once he lets go, they will linger long enough to give him time to touch the portkey and return to Hogwarts. Cedric asks that Harry take his body back to his parents, and Harry nods, pulls his wand away from the connection, causing the light dome and phoenix song to disappear. The shadows of the victims remain and close in upon Voldemort while Harry runs to grab Cedric. Just as Voldemort is approaching him ready to strike, Harry summons the Triwizard Cup to him, with the "Accio!" charm he learned for the first task. He grips Cedric's body and feels himself spinning away, and in the distance he can hear Voldemort's cry of fury.

Harry falls into the grass at Hogwarts, still clutching Cedric. Dumbledore gently commands him to let go. Around them, cries of "Diggory's dead!" sound in the air, and Dumbledore leaves to talk with Cedric's parents, after instructing Harry to remain where he is. Harry is grabbed by a pair of hands and dragged toward the castle, and only once he is there does he recognize his carrier as Moody. Moody sets Harry in his office and asks him what happened. As Harry explains in panic that Voldemort is back, Moody seems interested in knowing whether Voldemort forgave the Death Eaters who left him. Harry explodes with the information that there is a Death Eater at Hogwarts, and Moody assures him that it is not Karkaroff, who fled once he felt the Dark Mark Burn on his arm, but rather that he himself is the supporter. He says that he placed Harry's name into the Goblet of Fire and fired the Dark Mark into the sky. He claims that he alone remained faithful to Voldemort while everybody else left his side, and that he rigged the tournament so that Harry would be sure to reach the portkey Cup first.

Moody explains that he had nudged Hagrid into showing Harry the dragons, that he gave Neville a book about Mediterranean plants, including gillyweed, in hope that Harry would ask him for help, and finally that he had spoken loudly about gillyweed in a place where Dobby was sure to overhear. Moody says that in the maze, he stunned Fleur and placed the Imperius Curse on Krum, instructing him to finish off Cedric. Moody then raises his wand to finish off Harry, saying madly that he will be cherished as a son by Voldemort. The door bursts open. Dumbledore, Snape, and McGonagall enter, stupefying Moody.

Harry has never seen Dumbledore look so angry and so powerful, and he understands in an instant why he is the only wizard that Voldemort ever feared. Dumbledore says that Harry must not go to bed until he understands everything that has happened, and he begins by telling Snape to fetch him a strong truth potion¡XVeritaserum¡Xand to summon Winky from the kitchens. He tells McGonagall to tell a large black dog to wait in his office. Then he takes a key-ring from the stupefied Moody, and he begins opening the seven locks on the trunk in the room. He and Harry see a sleeping, disheveled man-the real Alastor Moody. Dumbledore explains that the impostor Moody had been making Polyjuice potion from the real Moody's hair (which is missing in chunks), and drinking it from his hip flask at every hour, thus giving him Moody's appearance. Time passes, and the sleeping figure changes from Moody into a pale young man whom Harry recognizes from the Pensieve as Mr. Crouch's son.

Suddenly, Snape returns with Winky, who flings herself onto the sleeping man, crying "Master Barty!" Dumbledore drops some of the Veritaserum into the man's mouth and wakes him up, asking him to speak. Young Barty Crouch explains that as he was in Azkaban, his dying mother persuaded his father to switch bodies with her son, so with Polyjuice potion, they did. The mother, appearing to be young Barty, died soon after and was buried, while Barty himself lived under an invisibility cloak under the watch of Winky. Nobody knew he was alive except for Bertha Jorkins, who entered their house on business and figured out what was going on. The elder Mr. Crouch modified her memory, but Voldemort broke the charm when he encountered her in Albania.

At the Quidditch World Cup, which Barty was allowed to attend under his invisibility cloak, he spied a wand sticking out of a pocket of the boy in front of him¡XHarry¡Xand he took it. When the Death Eaters who escaped Azkaban were levitating the Muggles, Barty grew angry and cast the Dark Mark into the sky to remind them of whom they had betrayed. Then, after Mr. Crouch fired Winky, Voldemort came to his house one night, told him what he had found out from Bertha Jorkins, and advised him to disguise himself as Moody and go to Hogwarts to rig the tournament. He kidnapped Moody the morning Hogwarts term began and he has been here ever since, keeping Moody alive to use his hairs for the potion, and to learn his ways and mannerisms. Meanwhile, Wormtail and Voldemort had moved into Mr. Crouch's house, where they kept Mr. Crouch under the Imperius Curse and instructed him to go about business as usual. Somehow, Mr. Crouch escaped and ran to Hogwarts to find Dumbledore. In the forest, Barty, disguised as Moody, found Mr. Crouch on the Marauder's Map, stunned Krum while Harry was gone, killed his father, transfigured him into a bone and buried him. He hurried over the help when Dumbledore, Harry, and Fudge congregated near the forest, wondering that had happened. While Winky sobs inconsolably, Barty grins insanely after finishing his story, he and says that now that his master has returned, he himself will be honored beyond all dreams.

A disgusted Dumbledore ties up Barty Crouch, sends Alastor Moody to the hospital wing, and takes Harry into his office, where Sirius awaits them. Harry doesn't want to think about what has happened, but he agrees to tell Dumbledore and Sirius everything while the memories are still fresh. Dumbledore explains the connection of the wands with the words "Priori Incantatem," meaning that the wands were not able to properly battle against each other because they were made from identical feathers from the same phoenix, Fawkes, who during this conversation has come to rest on Harry's knee. Once the twin wands connect, one forces the other to regurgitate its spells in the reverse order in which they were performed. As Harry explains what the shadows from Voldemort's wand did, Fawkes cries on Harry's leg, healing his wounds with phoenix tears. At the end, Dumbledore commends Harry's bravery in reliving the events, and he sends him to the hospital wing to sleep, accompanied by Sirius, disguised as a dog.

The Weasleys are waiting in the hospital wing, and Dumbledore instructs them not to question Harry. Madame Pomfrey gives Harry a potion for dreamless sleep, and he sleeps, only to be awakened in the night by an argument between Cornelius Fudge and Professor McGonagall. She is furious with him for having allowed a dementor to accompany him to see Barty Crouch, and to administer the fatal dementor's kiss, thus sucking out Barty's soul. Dumbledore enters and joins in the reprimands, as now Barty will not be able to testify for what he did. Fudge doesn't seem to believe that Voldemort has risen again, and he accuses Barty Crouch of being a lunatic, and Harry of hallucinating in his visions of Voldemort. Dumbledore then advises Fudge to take necessary precautions against Voldemort's return to power, such as removing Azkaban from dementor control, since dementors are natural allies of Voldemort; and such as resuming contact with the giants, who could be of great service against Voldemort, unless Voldemort gets to them first. Fudge refuses to do any of this, and Dumbledore accuses him of being blind to what is going on, and of being cowardly in his unwillingness to act. Dumbledore finally says that if Fudge refuses to ally with Dumbledore in a fight against Voldemort, then they must part ways.

Fudge is disbelieving, even after Snape shows him his own Dark Mark and explains that it burned that night, signifying Voldemort's return. Fudge leaves the room in a huff, after depositing Harry's Triwizard winnings, a thousand galleons, on his hospital bed. Dumbledore then asks Mrs. Weasley to beckon her husband and join him in his battle. He asks Sirius and Snape to make up, which they grudgingly do. He also asks Sirius to round up old friends, including Lupin. He says gravely to Snape to do what he knows he must. Everybody leaves except for Harry and the Weasleys. Harry doesn't want the money he has won, and he tries to give it to the Weasleys, who refuse to take it. Mrs. Weasley hugs him, and Harry feels on the verge of crying before he finishes his sleep potion and leaves the night behind him.

The following morning, Harry has a painful meeting with Cedric's heartbroken parents; he offers them the gold, but they refuse. Several days later, Harry, Ron, and Hermione visit Hagrid, who had made up with Madame Maxime and is planning to spend the summer with her, doing a mysterious task for Dumbledore. Hagrid says wisely that what will come, will come, and that all anyone can do is rise to meet it. On the night before leaving Hogwarts, the Great Hall is decorated in black to mourn Cedric, and during the dinner Dumbledore announces to everybody that Cedric was, in fact, murdered by Voldemort, and that Harry Potter risked his life to bring back Cedric's body. He says further that the time has come for everybody to understand the true merit of the Triwizard Tournament, which is to promote magical ties and understanding. He adds that Cedric was a good, brave, honest person who died unnecessarily at the hands of Voldemort. He says to think of the death as an example of how dangerous conversions to Dark Magic can be.

As the students bid each other farewell and prepare to board the Hogwarts Express back to London, Ron asks Krum for his autograph. On the train, Hermione shows Ron and Harry a beetle in a jar. She has caught Rita Skeeter, an unregistered animagus, who had been buzzing around Hogwarts collecting information for her untruthful articles. Malfoy and his cronies enter the train compartment at this point, and he says that Harry has picked the losing side, because Voldemort will triumph. At the same time, Harry, Hermione, Ron, and Fred and George strike them with various minor curses, knocking them out entirely. The Weasley twins explain the blackmailing fiasco, saying that Ludo Bagman paid them their winnings in Leprechaun gold, and that he was deeply in financial trouble with quite a few people and goblins at that point. At the end of the train ride, Harry pulls the twins aside and gives them his gold, telling them to use it for Weasleys' Wizard Wheezes, and also to buy Ron a new set of dress robes. They accept the gift gratefully, and Harry returns to live with the Dursleys for the summer.