The Prime Minister of Muggles (non-wizards) sits in his office contemplating the terrible events of his week. He hears a cough and turns around to see one of the portraits on his wall speaking, requesting an immediate meeting with the Minister of Magic, Cornelius Fudge. Despite the Prime Minister¡¦s protests, Fudge appears in the fireplace moments later. After awkwardly commiserating over the week¡¦s disasters, the Prime Minister silently recalls the other times Fudge has come to visit, glumly remembering how Fudge always bears bad news. The two Ministers first met immediately after the Prime Minister had taken office, again when Sirius Black escaped from the wizard¡¦s prison at Azkaban, once more when there was trouble at the Quidditch World Cup, and then to share news of a mass breakout at Azkaban.

This time, Fudge breathlessly explains that the evil wizard Lord Voldemort has returned and is singularly responsible for all the atrocities Muggles have endured this week. The Prime Minister is devastated and accuses Fudge of being an irresponsible Minister. Fudge admits he was fired three days ago. Suddenly, the portrait announces the arrival of the new Minister of Magic, Rufus Scrimgeour, who climbs out from the fireplace. Scrimgeour uses his wand to lock the office doors and draw the curtains before revealing that the Prime Minister¡¦s excellent new secretary, Kingsley Shacklebolt, is actually a highly trained Auror, sent by the Ministry of Magic to protect the Prime Minister. Scrimgeour then explains that Herbert Chorley is acting strangely because he has been struck with a poorly performed Imperius Curse. Chorley is currently being treated by a team of Healers from St. Mungo¡¦s Hospital for Magical Maladies and Injuries.

Two shadowy, hooded figures pop out of thin air on the banks of a dark, dirty river. The first figure, Narcissa, runs off and is pursued by the second, Bellatrix (or Bella). Bella desperately implores Narcissa to stop. When Bella finally catches hold of Narcissa¡¦s cloak, she begs her not to betray Voldemort. Narcissa draws her wand, and Bella expresses shock that Narcissa would threaten her own sister. They continue, finally arriving at Severus Snape¡¦s house. Snape is a professor of Potions at the Hogwarts School, Head of the House of Slytherin, and a supposedly reformed Death Eater. Snape is also a member of the Order of the Phoenix, a group dedicated to the destruction of Voldemort. Bellatrix bitterly explains to Snape that she doesn¡¦t trust him, because he continues to swear allegiance to Dumbledore, the headmaster of Hogwarts, and has not yet managed to kill Harry Potter.

Snape explains that he is working undercover at Hogwarts and cannot compromise his cover. Irritated, Snape alludes to Bellatrix¡¦s inability to kill Potter last year when they fought face to face at the Ministry of Magic, when Harry and Voldemort were both attempting to gain access to an ancient prophecy concerning their relationship. In response, Bella blames Lucius Malfoy for Harry¡¦s survival at the Ministry. Lucius is Narcissa¡¦s husband and the father of Draco Malfoy, a schoolmate of Harry¡¦s. Narcissa is livid that Bellatrix would suggest that her husband failed in his duties. Snape reminds the sisters that Harry is not an exceptional wizard and only continues to survive through a combination of sheer luck and a group of talented friends. Narcissa, sobbing, tells Snape that she believes her only son, the sixteen-year-old Draco, will have to perform the unnamed task. Narcissa believes this is payment for Lucius¡¦s failure to retrieve the prophecy from the Ministry. Narcissa falls to the floor, sobbing and moaning. Finally, Snape agrees to help Draco. Narcissa requests that he make the Unbreakable Vow, promising to watch over Draco as he performs this task, protect him from harm, and, if necessary, carry out the deed himself. Snape agrees.

Harry Potter is asleep, face pressed up against his bedroom window at Number Twelve Privet Drive, the home of his Aunt Petunia, Uncle Vernon, and despicable cousin Dudley Dursley. Clutched in Harry¡¦s hand is a letter from Dumbledore, who has asked to escort Harry to the Burrow. Harry wakes up to see Dumbledore approaching the door. Dumbledore steps inside and greets Petunia, Vernon, and Dudley. Harry notices that Dumbledore¡¦s hand is shriveled and blackened, but Dumbledore will not yet tell him why. When Harry leaves the living room to pack his trunk, Dumbledore reminds the Dursleys that when Dumbledore left Harry on their front porch, sixteen years ago, he put a spell on the house causing Harry to have powerful protection as long as he called this house home.

Even though Harry¡¦s time at Four Privet Drive has been miserable, it has kept him safe. Now Dumbledore requests that the Dursleys allow Harry to return home once more before he comes of age at seventeen and the spell is broken. They reluctantly comply, and Harry and Dumbledore leave together. Harry has not yet learned how to Apparate (transport himself instantaneously through magic) and must clutch Dumbledore¡¦s arm as they travel. For Harry, it feels like being smushed through a rubber tube. Dumbledore and Harry arrive at the home of one of Dumbledore¡¦s old friends, Horace Slughorn. Harry assumes that Slughorn will be replacing Dolores Umbridge as Defense Against the Dark Arts professor. Slughorn is preoccupied with making the acquaintance of potentially influential young wizards, and Harry unknowingly entices him to accept Dumbledore¡¦s offer to return to the school.

Harry and Dumbledore Apparate again, arriving, moments later at the Burrow where Harry¡¦s schoolmate, Ron Weasley, lives with his family. Dumbledore reminds Harry that no matter what the Daily Prophet prints about Harry being the ¡§Chosen One,¡¨ only Harry and Dumbledore know the true contents of the prophecy. Dumbledore suggests that Harry share the prophecy with his two best friends, Ron Weasley and Hermione Granger. Dumbledore also tells Harry that he will be giving Harry private lessons this year, and that O.W.L. scores will be arriving soon, and requests that Harry keep his Invisibility Cloak with him at all times.

Inside the Burrow, Harry sees Tonks, an Auror with the Order of the Phoenix. Although she is usually chipper and bright, Tonks seems dejected, even ill. Harry stays in the room of Fred and George Weasley, twin brothers who have opened a joke shop called Weasleys¡¦ Wizard Wheezes. Harry is awoken by the shouts of his two best friends, Ron and Hermione. They are eager to hear about Harry¡¦s night with Dumbledore, and he fills them in on his visit to Horace Slughorn. Ron¡¦s younger sister, Ginny, wanders in, complaining about her brother Bill¡¦s beautiful fiance, Fleur, whom she calls ¡§Phlegm.¡¨ Ginny, Hermione, and Mrs. Weasley all dislike the gorgeous Fleur. Once Ginny leaves, Harry tells his friends that he will be receiving private lessons from Dumbledore this term and shares the contents of the prophecy. He also reminds his friends that they should be receiving their scores from the O.W.L. examinations they took last year at Hogwarts. Hermione, an extremely conscientious student, panics and runs downstairs. Hermione receives all Oustandings, save an Exceeds Expectations in Defense Against the Dark Arts. Harry and Ron both do well, passing seven O.W.L.s each. Harry receives an Outstanding in Defense Against the Dark Arts. Harry is pleased with his scores but a bit sad that his Potions mark, Outstanding, is not strong enough for him to be an Auror.

Harry finds out he will be Quidditch Captain this year. Mrs. Weasley arranges a trip to Diagon Alley to buy school supplies, and the usually bustling area is desolate. The group splits, with Harry, Hermione, Ron, and Hagrid, who has come along for added security, headed to Madam Malkin¡¦s for robes. Hagrid waits outside as the students enter Madam Malkin¡¦s, where they find Draco Malfoy being fitted. Malfoy accuses Hermione of being a Mudblood, or a wizard born to Muggle parents. Eventually Malfoy storms out, and Ron, Hermione, and Harry finish their fittings and meet back up with the rest of the Weasleys. When they arrive at Fred and George¡¦s joke shop, the store is packed with customers. Harry spots Draco scurrying up the street alone. He pulls Ron and Hermione under his Invisibility Cloak, and they follow Draco into Borgin and Burkes, a store stocked with Dark objects.

Harry and his friends eavesdrop on Draco¡¦s conversation with Borgin. Draco asks Borgin if he can fix something, threatening the shop owner with something Harry cannot see, and reminding him that his family is friends with Fenir Greyback. Draco suggests that there are two objects, and one needs to be kept safe in the shop. Borgin swears secrecy, and Draco leaves. Hermione ducks out from under the coat, attempting to see what Draco was talking about, but Borgin is suspicious. Hermione asks about a necklace, but Borgin orders Hermione out. Before they board the Hogwarts Express, Harry tells Mr. Weasley his suspicions about Draco being a Death Eater. On board, students stare at Harry. Harry spots Luna Lovegood and Neville Longbottom and sits down.

Ron and Hermione enter the compartment, finished with their prefect duties. A young woman hands scrolls to Harry and Neville, inviting them to join Professor Slughorn for lunch. Harry sees that Ginny has also been invited. Slughorn has gathered together what he hopes is a group of influential students he would like to cultivate relationships with, and repeatedly asks the students about their family connections. When they finally escape, Harry asks Ginny how she got tangled up with Slughorn, given that the Weasleys are not an especially influential family. Ginny tells Harry that Slughorn saw her hex Zacharias Smith and was impressed with her skills. Harry has an idea and excuses himself, pulling out his invisibility cloak and following Zabini, a Slytherin who had also been at lunch with Slughorn.

Harry sneaks into the Slytherin compartment as Zabini enters, then he dives into the luggage rack. Harry fears that one of his sneakers slid out from under the cloak as he dove out of the way and sees Draco¡¦s eyes scanning the racks. Draco boasts that he might not even bother returning to Hogwarts next year, having moved on to bigger things. Draco¡¦s goons, Crabbe and Goyle, look dumbfounded. Draco continues to talk about how things will be different when Voldemort finally takes over. The train approaches Hogwarts, and the Slytherins begin pulling their trunks down. Goyle¡¦s trunk smacks Harry on the head, and he lets out a gasp of pain. Malfoy stares up at the luggage racks. After his classmates file out, Draco turns around and, without warning, casts a paralyzing spell at the luggage rack. Harry tumbles down, frozen. Draco kicks Harry¡¦s face and throws the invisibility cloak over his frozen body.

Paralyzed under the Invisibility Cloak, Harry is powerless. Suddenly, his cloak flies off and Tonks appears, helping him up. Together, they hurry toward Hogwarts. As Harry enters the Great Hall, students turn and stare. Dumbledore introduces Professor Slughorn as the new Professor of Potions and explains that Snape will now be teaching Defense Against the Dark Arts. Harry, Ron, and Hermione are shocked. Dumbledore has never before trusted Snape with such an important position. Ron points out that the job is jinxed, as no one has ever lasted more than a year as a Defense Against the Dark Arts instructor. As they leave the Great Hall and return to their dormitories, Harry tells Ron what he overheard in the Slytherin compartment. Ron remains skeptical about Draco¡¦s relationship to Voldemort. They run into Hagrid, who tells the boys he¡¦ll see them at Care of Magical Creatures the next morning. Neither Ron nor Harry nor Hermione has signed up for the class. In the past, the three classmates only endured Care of Magical Creatures out of devotion to Hagrid, and they wonder what he will think when he finds out his three best students are no longer interested.

The next morning, Harry fills Hermione on what he overheard in the Slytherin compartment. Like Ron, Hermione is doubtful about Draco¡¦s relationship to Voldemort. Hermione is more concerned about what Hagrid will think when he realizes that none of them have signed up for his class. Before classes begin, Heads of House must sort out the students¡¦ schedules, confirming that each student has received the necessary O.W.L. grade to continue on with their chosen N.E.W.T.s. When it is Harry¡¦s turn, Professor McGonagall asks why he is not continuing with Potions if it is still his desire to one day be an Auror. Harry explains that he did not think his O.W.L. score was acceptable, but McGonagall tells him Slughorn has lower requirements than Snape, and Harry can continue. Harry tells her that he did not buy any of the proper books or ingredients, but McGonagall insists that he can easily borrow them. Moments later, Ron is cleared for the same set of subjects: Charms, Defense Against the Dark Arts, Herbology, Transfiguration, and Potions.

In Defense Against the Dark Arts, students begin work on nonverbal spells. When Harry mouths off to Snape, he receives a detention for Saturday night. Later, Harry receives a scroll from Dumbledore, announcing that their first private lesson will be Saturday night. Delighted that he has a valid excuse to skip Snape¡¦s detention, Harry heads off to Slughorn¡¦s Potions class. Harry and Ron ask Slughorn to borrow two Potions textbooks. Slughorn complies, digging two used books out of a cupboard. Slughorn tells the class that the creator of the best potion will win a small vial of Felix Felicis, an extraordinarily lucky potion. Harry opens his used textbook to the appropriate page, but he finds it difficult to read because the previous owner has scribbled notes all over the pages. Finally, Harry opts to follow the alternate instructions written in the margins, and his potion turns out perfectly. Slughorn is delighted and awards Harry the vial of Felix Felicis, but Hermione is outraged and accuses Harry of cheating. Harry notices some writing along the bottom of the back cover. It reads: ¡§This Book is the Property of the Half-Blood Prince.¡¨

Harry reports to Dumbledore¡¦s office. Dumbledore explains that he is going to teach Harry more about Lord Voldemort and hopes this information will ultimately help Harry survive. They gather around the Pensieve, a shallow stone basin that allows its users to experience the memories of others. Dumbledore takes a small vial of memory from his robe and tells Harry that they are going to view one of Bob Ogden¡¦s memories. Ogden worked for the Department of Magical Law Enforcement. Suddenly, Harry and Dumbledore are standing in a country lane, watching a plump man in glasses read a wooden signpost. Ogden cautiously approaches a house. As Ogden nears the house, Harry hears a voice speaking Parseltongue, the ancient language of snakes, telling Ogden he is not welcome. The voice, coming from Morfin, a man in rags, moves closer and jinxes Ogden. Suddenly, another man rushes out of the cabin¡Xit is Morfin¡¦s father, Gaunt. Ogden tells the men that he is here to investigate Morfin¡¦s use of magic on a Muggle.

Ogden meets Gaunt¡¦s daughter, Merope. Ogden presents a summons to the Ministry for a hearing, and Gaunt reacts with rage, first showing Ogden his ugly gold ring with a black stone, then dragging Merope toward Ogden by the locket hanging around her neck. Gaunt shows Ogden the symbol on the locket, explaining that they are the last living descendents of Salazar Slytherin. Gaunt admits that his son performed a jinx on a Muggle, and Morfin accuses Merope of being in love with the Muggle boy, Tom, whom he jinxed. Gaunt erupts into anger, screaming at Merope with disgust and attempting to strangle her, which Ogden prevents using magic. Morfin hops up, wielding a knife and his wand, and Ogden flees the house.

Dumbledore and Harry return to Hogwarts. Dumbledore tells Harry that Ogden Apparated back to the Ministry and returned with reinforcements. Morfin and Gaunt were arrested and sentenced to time in Azkaban¡Xsix months for Gaunt and three years for Morfin. Gaunt¡¦s first name, Dumbledore explains, was Marvolo, which Harry recognizes as the name of 
Voldemort¡¦s grandfather. Harry concludes that Merope must be Voldemort¡¦s mother. Voldemort¡¦s father, Dumbledore continues, was Tom, the Muggle boy Morfin jinxed. Merope used a love option on Tom, and when Marvolo returned from Azkaban he would not speak to or acknowledge his Muggle-loving daughter. Within a few months of their marriage, Tom returned to his Muggle village, presumably after Merope¡¦s love potion wore off. Meanwhile, Merope was pregnant with Voldemort. Harry asks Dumbledore if it is acceptable for him to share this information with Ron and Hermione, and Dumbledore gives his permission.

On his way out, Harry notices the black and gold ring, the same ring Marvolo showed Ogden and that Dumbledore was wearing when he collected Harry from the Dursleys. Dumbledore tells Harry he acquired it recently, around the same time he injured his hand. Hermione notices that Dumbledore¡¦s seat in the Great Hall has been empty frequently. At Quidditch tryouts, Harry picks Ron as Keeper, despite his inconsistent performance history. After tryouts, Harry, Ron, and Hermione head down to Hagrid¡¦s cabin. Hagrid is angry with the students for not taking his class, but he finally forgives them when Hermione offers to go with Hagrid to visit his giant spider friend, Aragog, in the forest. Hagrid declines, claiming that the rest of the tribe would eat any visitor other than Hagrid, but he is cheered by the offer. Professor Slughorn invites Harry and Hermione to a small party for his favorite students in his room. Harry declines because he has to make up a detention with Snape, but Hermione agrees to attend.

The students prepare for their first trip to Hogsmeade. Ginny brings Harry a parchment from Dumbledore arranging their next lesson. The students set out into the terrible weather, bundled up in cloaks and scarves. On their way to the Three Broomsticks, a local pub, Harry runs into Mundungus. Mundungus is struggling with a pile of items, and Harry notices that some of Mundungus¡¦s things belong to Sirius. Harry is outraged and poised to attack, but Tonks appears and stops Harry from doing so, thereby preventing him from committing a grave breach of Magical Law. Harry, Ron, and Hermione enter the pub and order a round of drinks. They agree that the day has been a waste and decide to head back to Hogwarts, following Katie Bell and a friend out of the bar and into the cold sleet.

Katie is holding a package, which her friend, Leanne, tries to grab from her hands. Katie grabs it back and suddenly shoots up six feet into the air, screaming in pain. Harry, Ron, and Hermione run forward to help, pulling Katie from the air. Harry runs toward Hogwarts for help, encountering Hagrid along the way. Hagrid scoops up Katie and dashes toward the school. Leanne explains that Katie came back from the bathroom at the Three Broomsticks holding the package and told Leanne it was a surprise for somebody at Hogwarts and she had to deliver it. Katie had refused to say who had given her the package. When Katie and Leanne fought over the package, it accidentally opened and the silver and opal necklace inside was exposed. Harry recognizes the necklace from Borgin and Burkes. He brings it to Professor McGonagall, who orders the Hogwarts groundskeeper, Filch, to deliver it to Snape. Harry tells McGonagall that he believes Draco Malfoy gave Katie the necklace. McGonagall is extremely doubtful of Harry¡¦s theory and informs him that Draco was in detention with her all day.

Katie is moved to St. Mungo¡¦s for further treatment. Harry reports to Dumbledore¡¦s office for their next lesson. They enter the Pensieve, this time rooting through the memory of Caractacus Burke, the co-owner of Borgin and Burkes. Harry and Dumbledore see Caractacus talking about Merope¡¦s gold locket, claiming that he bought it from her for ten Galleons, an amount far below the locket¡¦s actual value. Clearly, Caractacus took advantage of Merope¡¦s desperation. When Harry asks Dumbledore why Merope didn¡¦t use her magic to get food and shelter, Dumbledore explains that he thinks Merope was so devastated by Tom¡¦s desertion that she either chose to stop using magic altogether or found her powers drained by her sadness.

Next, Harry and Dumbledore enter one of Dumbledore¡¦s memories. A much younger Dumbledore approaches the door of an orphanage and asks to speak with the house matron, Mrs. Cole. When she arrives, Dumbledore explains that he is here to offer Tom Marvolo Riddle a place at his school. Mrs. Cole warns Dumbledore that Tom Riddle is a funny boy, and Dumbledore is not surprised. Tom regularly bullies the other children, killing one child¡¦s pet rabbit and leading two other children into a cave at the seaside. After emerging from the cave, the two are never the same again. Mrs. Cole leads Dumbledore to Tom, who is handsome. Dumbledore introduces himself, but Tom is suspicious until Dumbledore tells him that Hogwarts is a school for magic. Tom is excited, but rude and belligerent, demanding that Dumbledore prove himself. In response, Dumbledore sets Tom¡¦s wardrobe on fire with a flick of his wand.

Dumbledore puts out the flames and asks Tom to retrieve a box from inside his wardrobe full of things Tom has stolen from his fellow orphans. Dumbledore demands that he return them before enrolling at Hogwarts. Dumbledore offers to accompany Tom to Diagon Alley to purchase his school supplies, but Tom insists on going by himself. Tom also tells Dumbledore that he dislikes his name because it is too common. Harry and Dumbledore return to Hogwarts. On his way out of Dumbledore¡¦s office, Harry notices that Marvolo¡¦s ring is gone.

On their way back from Quidditch practice, Harry and Ron run into Ginny and Dean Thomas kissing in the entranceway to the common room. Something about the scene makes Harry feel sick. Ron starts screaming at Ginny, and she erupts, accusing Ron of never having kissed a girl. Ginny reminds Ron how Harry kissed Cho Chang last year, and how Hermione kissed Victor Krum the year before that. Ron is embarrassed and outraged. Later, Ron asks Harry if he really thinks Hermione kissed Victor Krum, but Harry changes the subject. Harry is worried about the way he is starting to feel about Ginny and tries to assure himself that he¡¦s only being protective of his best friend¡¦s sister. Ron is still angry the next day and ignores Hermione.

Meanwhile Harry keeps trying to boost Ron¡¦s Quidditch confidence before the match against Slytherin, but nothing seems to work. The night before the game, Harry has an idea about how to make Ron lucky. The next morning at breakfast, Harry hands Ron a cup of pumpkin juice, but Hermione notices that Harry is holding a small glass vial in his other hand. Ron drinks the juice, and Hermione, assuming it was Felix Felicis that Harry slipped into Ron¡¦s drink, admonishes Harry. Later, Ron asks Harry if he spiked his pumpkin juice with Felix Felicis. Harry raises his eyebrows and says nothing. The game begins with Gryffindor in an early lead, playing perfectly. Ron saves goals with ease, and Harry catches the Snitch and ends the game. Hermione once again angrily accuses Harry of lacing Ron¡¦s juice with Felix Felicis. Harry explains that he only pretended to spike Ron¡¦s juice, because he knew just the suggestion of luck would be enough to give Ron the confidence he needed. Later, at the Gryffindor celebration, Harry spots Ron kissing Lavender Brown. Harry sees Hermione darting out the door. Harry follows her into an empty classroom, where she is frantically practicing spells and hissing about Ron. Moments later, Ron and Lavender burst into the same room, and Hermione walks out. Harry thinks he hears a sob as she leaves.

Christmas is approaching, and Ron and Hermione continue to fight. Ron insists that Hermione has no right to be angry with him, because she kissed Victor Krum. Meanwhile, Hermione warns Harry that lots of girls are planning on slipping him love potions. Romilda Vane gives Harry a box of Chocolate Cauldrons, which he shoves into his trunk. Harry decides to ask Luna to accompany him to Slughorn¡¦s Christmas party, as friends. Later, Harry, Ron, and Lavender run into Hermione, who announces that she¡¦s attending Slughorn¡¦s party with Cormac McLaggen. Ron is livid. At the party, Harry sees Draco Malfoy being tugged into the room by his ear by Filch, who caught Draco prowling the halls and trying to sneak into Slughorn¡¦s party. Slughorn decides it is OK for Draco to stay, but Snape insists on having a word with Draco in private. Harry slips on the Invisibility Cloak and follows them to an empty classroom, where Snape tells Draco that he must be more careful. Draco is angry and defensive, shouting back at Snape and insisting that he doesn¡¦t need any help. Malfoy storms out, and Snape follows moments later.

Back at the Burrow for Christmas break, Harry tells Ron what he overheard. Ron reminds Harry that Snape may have only been pretending to help Draco so he could learn more about Voldemort¡¦s plans. At dinner, Harry learns that Remus Lupin has been living underground with the werewolves, spying on their interactions with Voldemort. Lupin tells Harry about Fenir Greyback, who positions himself near the homes of children on the full moon. Harry discovers that Greyback is the werewolf who bit Lupin. Harry asks Lupin if James Potter ever called himself the Half-Blood Prince. Lupin tells Harry that James never mentioned anything about princes. Harry is crushed. On Christmas morning, Mrs. Weasley spots her estranged Ministry-worker son, Percy, walking up the path and bursts into tears. Percy approaches the Burrow along with Rufus Scrimgeour, the Minister of Magic. Percy coldly apologizes for the intrusion, and Scrimgeour asks Harry to give him a tour of the grounds. Outside, Harry refuses to tell Scrimgeour about the prophecy. Scrimgeour asks Harry to stand alongside the Ministry and give the Wizarding community the illusion that they¡¦re working together, but Harry refuses, explaining that he disagrees with the Ministry¡¦s methods. Scrimgeour accuses Harry of being Dumbledore¡¦s man, and Harry readily agrees with this characterization.

After New Year¡¦s, the students return to Hogwarts. Hermione is waiting with a scroll from Dumbledore arranging their next lesson. Harry tells Hermione what he overheard between Draco and Snape. The next morning, a large sign is posted in the common room, announcing Apparition lessons for all students seventeen years of age. That night, Harry reports to Dumbledore¡¦s office as scheduled. Dumbledore asks Harry about his meeting with the Minister. Harry tells Dumbledore that Scrimgeour accused Harry of being Dumbledore¡¦s man and that Harry agreed. To Harry¡¦s embarrassment, Dumbledore¡¦s eyes fill with tears. Harry tells Dumbledore about everything he overheard between Snape and Draco, but Dumbledore seems unconcerned. First, Dumbledore tells Harry about Tom Riddle¡¦s experience at Hogwarts. He was sorted into Slytherin almost immediately and showed no more signs of arrogance or aggression. He was talented and attractive and drew attention and praise from the faculty.

Tom was obsessed with his parentage, and after finding no traces of his father having ever been at Hogwarts, he realized he was a half-blood and adopted the name Lord Voldemort. After researching his middle name, Marvolo, Tom realized that he was a direct descendent of Slytherin. In the summer of his sixteenth year he returned to his mother¡¦s home. Dumbledore and Harry enter the Pensieve. Harry realizes that they are in Gaunt¡¦s house, but it is incredibly filthy. A man with an overgrown beard is slumped in a chair and lunges at Tom when he enters the house. Speaking Parseltongue, Tom commands him to stop, and he does. Tom asks for Marvolo, but Morfin explains that he is dead. Morfin accuses Tom of looking like the Muggle his sister loved. Suddenly, the room goes dark, and Harry feels Dumbledore¡¦s hand on his arm. Dumbledore explains that Tom stupefied Morfin, stole his wand, and went to the town to murder the man who left his mother and his grandparents, destroying the last of the Riddle line. When he returned to Morfin, he implanted a false memory of the murders into Morfin¡¦s mind.

Later, Morfin was convicted of the murders by the Ministry, who traced the magic back to Morfin¡¦s wand. Dumbledore explains that in the last few weeks of Morfin¡¦s life, he was able to use Legilimency to coax out his real memory. Morfin died before he could be released from Azkaban. Dumbledore pulls out another vial of memories, but it is unusually cloudy. They re-enter the Pensieve, and Harry sees a younger Horace Slughorn sitting with half a dozen boys, including Tom Riddle, who is wearing Marvolo¡¦s ring. The students start to leave, but Tom lags behind and asks Slughorn about Horcruxes. As Slughorn answers, the room becomes extremely cloudy, and Slughorn¡¦s voice sounds strangely loud, telling Tom he doesn¡¦t know anything about Horcruxes. They return to Dumbledore¡¦s office, and he explains that the memory has been tampered with by Slughorn, who did not want Dumbledore to know what really happened when Tom asked about Horcruxes. Dumbledore asks Harry to attempt to retrieve the real memory from Slughorn.

The next day in Potions, the students are assigned antidotes, and the Half-Blood Prince¡¦s textbook is of no help to Harry. He finally finds the words ¡§Just shove a bezoar down their throats¡¨ scribbled in a margin. Rummaging through the supply cupboard, Harry finds a bezoar, a stone from the stomach of a goat, and runs back to his seat. When Slughorn approaches his cauldron, Harry hands over the bezoar, and Slughorn laughs. After class, Harry asks Slughorn about Horcruxes, and Slughorn freezes. He knows immediately that Dumbledore has sent Harry and refuses to answer. The students begin their Apparition lessons. It is normally impossible to Apparate or Disapparate within Hogwarts, but the restrictions are lifted within the Great Hall for one hour so the students can practice. After Apparition practice, Ron and Harry return to the dorms, and Harry pulls out the Marauder¡¦s Map to try and locate where in Hogwarts Draco Malfoy is. Ron spots him in the Slytherin common room. Harry continues to regularly consult the Marauder¡¦s Map to check on Draco¡¦s whereabouts. Sometimes he is unable to locate him on the map at all.

On the morning of his birthday, Ron tears through the presents at the foot of his bed as Harry rummages through his trunk for the Marauder¡¦s Map. Ron starts eating Chocolate Cauldrons and leans on his bedpost, looking unfocused. Ron tells Harry he¡¦s in love with Romilda Vane. Harry suddenly realizes that Ron has eaten the love potion¡Vspiked Chocolate Cauldrons Romilda slipped him before Christmas¡Xthey fell out of Harry¡¦s trunk and Ron assumed they were one of his presents. Harry brings Ron to Slughorn, who makes an antidote, which Ron quickly drinks. Slughorn pulls out a bottle of oak-matured mead he intended to give Dumbledore for Christmas and pours Ron a glass. Ron drinks his before the toast is over and suddenly shoots up in the air, his eyes bulging and foam coming from his mouth. Slughorn appears mystified, and Harry sprints to the cabinet and finds a bezoar, which he shoves down Ron¡¦s throat. Ron gasps and goes still.

In the hospital wing, Fred, George, Ginny, Hermione, Hagrid, and Harry gather to look after Ron. Ginny points out that if Slughorn had intended to give the mead to Dumbledore, the poison might have been intended for Dumbledore as well. Mr. and Mrs. Weasley arrive, and Harry, Hagrid, and Hermione leave. Harry is approached by Cormac McLaggen, who wants to know if he can replace Ron as Quidditch Keeper. Harry agrees. On the way to the Quidditch pitch for a match against Hufflepuff, Harry spots Draco walking away from the field with two young girls. Harry is desperate to know where Draco is going but is already late for the match. During the game, Harry is hit with a Bludger. Harry wakes up in the hospital wing next to Ron. Madam Pomfrey tells Harry that he cracked his skull. Ron tells Harry that Gryffindor lost the match by a landslide. Harry remembers seeing Malfoy before the match and summons Kreacher, who instantly appears with Dobby, the Hogwarts House Elf. Harry requests that the two elves follow Malfoy, making sure to tell Kreacher he cannot warn Malfoy or fill him in.

At their next lesson, Dumbledore asks Harry if he was able to retrieve the memory from Slughorn. Harry has not done so but promises to try harder. Dumbledore is extremely disappointed. They return to studying Voldemort. Dumbledore explains how Voldemort had been an excellent student. Many faculty members suggested that he apply for a position at the Ministry after graduation. Instead, Voldemort asked if he might remain at Hogwarts as an instructor of Defense against the Dark Arts. Then-Headmaster Dippet told Voldemort that he was too young but should consider reapplying later. Voldemort took a job working at Borgin and Burkes, persuading people to part with Dark or unusual objects. Harry and Dumbledore enter the Pensieve to view a memory of Hokey, a House Elf to a very rich old witch named Hepzibah Smith.

Hepzibah is enthralled by Voldemort and offers to show him two extremely rare objects, a small golden cup and a locket. Hephzibah tells Voldemort that the cup belonged to Helga Hufflepuff, one of the four founders of Hogwarts. The gold locket bears Slytherin¡¦s mark and is the same locket that Merope sold to Borgin and Burkes many years earlier. Voldemort¡¦s eyes turn scarlet as Hepzibah explains how she bought the locket from the shop and refuses to give it up. Harry and Dumbledore return to Hogwarts. Dumbledore explains that Hepzibah Smith died days after the visit they witnessed, supposedly poisoned by Hokey, who later confessed to the crime. Harry and Dumbledore agree that Voldemort must have murdered Hepzibah and changed Hokey¡¦s memory so that she would confess to the crime. After Hokey was convicted, Hepzibah¡¦s family realized that the locket and the cup were missing. Around the same time, Voldemort left his job at Borgin and Burkes and was not seen or heard from for a very long time. Dumbledore notes that Voldemort has now committed another murder, this time killing for gain rather than revenge.

The next memory they witness is one of Dumbledore¡¦s, from ten years after Hepzibah¡¦s death. Dumbledore is seated in his office at Hogwarts when Voldemort knocks and enters. Voldemort reminds Dumbledore that he no longer goes by the name Tom Riddle. Voldemort again expresses his interest in teaching Defense Against the Dark Arts, but Dumbledore is skeptical and denies him. Harry and Dumbledore return to Dumbledore¡¦s present-day office. Dumbledore reminds Harry that ever since he denied Voldemort the position of Defense Against the Dark Arts professor, Hogwarts has not been able to keep a Defense teacher longer than one year. Later, Harry finds a new spell, Sectumsempra, scrawled in the margins of his Potions textbook, with the words ¡§For Enemies.¡¨ Kreacher and Dobby reappear to report back. Dobby tells Harry that while Draco is not breaking any rules, he makes regular trips to the seventh floor, bringing other students with him to stand guard. Harry remembers the Room of Requirement on the seventh floor, which transforms into whatever its transformer requires.

Harry decides to sneak up on Draco when he is in the Room of Requirement, but Hermione reminds him that unless he knows exactly what Draco is doing, he cannot summon the Room, because he won¡¦t know what he needs it to be. Kreacher and Dobby leave. Harry thinks Draco must have stolen some Polyjuice Potion from Slughorn and has been using it on Crabbe and Goyle, transforming them into first-year girls to avoid suspicion.

The next weekend, Ron and Hermione go to Hogsmeade to practice Apparition. After they leave, Harry attempts to get into the Room of Requirement to see what Draco is doing. After thirty minutes of trying, Harry still cannot gain access to the room. Frustrated, Harry rushes at the wall. His Invisibility Cloak slips off, and Tonks suddenly appears, looking thin and haggard. Tonks asks Harry if he¡¦s heard from any members of the Order, but Harry explains that since Sirius¡¦s death, no one writes to him anymore. Tonks¡¦s eyes fill with tears. Later, Harry tells his friends about running into Tonks and that he suspects she may have been in love with Sirius.

Harry, Ron, and Hermione receive a tear-stained letter from Hagrid announcing Aragog¡¦s death and requesting their presence at his funeral. They decide it¡¦s too dangerous to travel outside of Hogwarts at night. Ron tells Harry that he should try using Felix Felicis to acquire Slughorn¡¦s memory, and Hermione agrees. Ron and Hermione head off to Hogsmeade for their Apparition tests. Hermione passes her exam, but Ron doesn¡¦t. After dinner, Harry takes a gulp of Felix Felicis, and a warm glow fills him. Harry puts on his Invisibility Cloak, telling his friends he¡¦s decided to go to Hagrid¡¦s. Harry heads toward Hagrid¡¦s, running into Slughorn on the way. Harry explains about Aragog and Hagrid. Slughorn tells Harry that the venom of an acromantula is extremely rare and almost impossible to gather. Harry invites Slughorn to the funeral. Harry, Hagrid, and Slughorn step into Hagrid¡¦s backyard, where a grave has been dug. While Hagrid is crying, Slughorn approaches the giant spider and collects a bottleful of venom. After Aragog is buried, they sit down for drinks.

Harry senses that he should abstain from drinking too much, and nonverbally casts a Refilling Charm, making sure Slughorn and Hagrid¡¦s glasses stay full. Hagrid and Slughorn continue to drink heavily. Harry tells Slughorn about the pain of his mother and father dying so young and reminds Slughorn of how much he liked Harry¡¦s mother, Lily. Harry tells a very drunk Slughorn that the only way to stop Voldemort is to give Harry the true memory. Slughorn tells Harry he is not proud of what it contains, but he hands it over anyway. Harry feels the Felix Felicis wearing off and walks back to the castle. Dumbledore is delighted with Harry¡¦s success and empties Slughorn¡¦s memory into the Pensieve. This time, there is no fog or loud voices. When Voldemort asks about Horcruxes, Slughorn explains that a Horcrux is an object in which a person has concealed part of their soul. Even if the person is attacked or destroyed, a small part of his soul lives on outside of his body¡Xand therefore he can never die. Slughorn goes on to explain that very few would want that kind of existence, and that death is often preferable. Splitting one¡¦s soul is an unnatural violation and can only occur when one commits the supreme act of evil, murder.

Slughorn tells Voldemort not to repeat anything he has just heard, and the memory ends. Dumbledore tells Harry that he suspects Voldemort has split his soul into seven pieces, and that no wizard has ever attempted multiple Horcruxes. The only way to kill Voldemort is to destroy all seven Horcruxes. Dumbledore believes that the seventh Horcrux is Voldemort¡¦s regenerated body and should be destroyed last. Of the other six, two are already gone¡Xthe diary Harry obliterated his first year at Hogwarts, and Marvolo¡¦s ring, which Dumbledore withered his hand destroying. Harry suggests Slytherin¡¦s locket and Hufflepuff¡¦s cup. Dumbledore wonders if one of the remaining two Horcruxes belonged to Ravenclaw, since Gryffindor¡¦s only known relic, the sword, is safe in Dumbledore¡¦s office. Dumbledore believes that Nagini, the snake, is the sixth. It is revealed that when Dumbledore leaves Hogwarts for long stretches of time, he is out hunting for Horcruxes. Dumbledore thinks he is close to finding another, and tells Harry that he can come along to help destroy it. Dumbledore reminds Harry that his ability to love makes him a great and powerful wizard, explaining that this capacity for love is the only thing that has kept him from being lured to the Dark Arts.

Ron and Lavender have broken up, as have Ginny and Dean. Harry is ecstatic. Katie Bell recovers and returns to school. Tensions run high for the Gryffindor vs. Ravenclaw game. A few days before the match, Harry checks the Marauder¡¦s Map and sees Draco in the boys¡¦ bathroom with Moaning Myrtle. Harry rushes to the bathroom where Draco is crying at the sink, sobbing that unless he does something soon, he will be killed. Draco spots Harry and pulls out his wand. Harry yells ¡§Sectumsempra,¡¨ the hex scribbled in the margins of the Half-Blood Prince¡¦s book. Blood spurts from Draco¡¦s face and chest, and Myrtle beings screaming. Snape bursts into the room and heals Draco¡¦s wounds almost immediately. Snape hurries Draco to the hospital wing, commanding Harry to wait behind. When Snape returns, he asks Harry where he learned the spell, and demands that Harry bring him his Potions textbook. Harry leaves and runs into Ron, who lends Harry his Potions textbook. Harry sprints to the seventh floor and opens the Room of Requirement. Harry sees the broken Vanishing Cabinet Montague used last year. Harry hides the Half-Blood Prince¡¦s book and runs back to the bathroom.

Snape is skeptical of Ron¡¦s book and gives Harry detention every Saturday until the end of the term, which means Harry will have to miss Saturday¡¦s Quidditch match. Harry¡¦s teammates are devastated. That Saturday, when Harry is finally dismissed from detention, the Quidditch match is already over. Harry returns to the Gryffindor common room and is greeted with a huge celebration. Gryffindor won the match and the championship. Ginny runs toward Harry and throws her arms around him. Without thinking about it, Harry kisses her. Students immediately begin gossiping about Harry and Ginny. Ron chides the new couple but lets them know he has no objection. At lunch, Hermione shows Harry a newspaper article about Eileen Prince, and suggests that she may be the Half-Blood Prince. Harry receives a scroll asking him to report to Dumbledore¡¦s office as quickly as possible.

On his way, Harry runs into a distressed Professor Trelawney. Harry asks her what happened, and she tells him that she was trying to get into the Room of Requirement to hide her sherry bottles, but when she went in, someone was there, whooping with excitement. She was hurled out of the room almost immediately. Harry tells Trelawney that she should tell Dumbledore what happened, and they head off together. Professor Trelawney tells Harry about her first interview with Dumbledore before she was hired. She was staying at the Hog¡¦s Head, and Dumbledore came to see her in her room. Harry knows that this was when she made the prophecy about Harry and Voldemort, but Trelawney only remembers feeling funny. She and Dumbledore were interrupted by Snape, who was caught eavesdropping by a barman. Harry realizes that it was Snape who told Voldemort about Trelawney¡¦s prophecy, thus sending Voldemort after Harry and his mother and father. Harry leaves Trelawney in the hallway and races toward Dumbledore¡¦s office. Before Harry can confront Dumbledore, Dumbledore tells him that he has found a Horcrux and that Harry will be accompanying him to destroy it. Dumbledore tells him that the Horcrux is hidden in a cave on the coast, the same cave in which Voldemort once terrorized two children from his orphanage.

Harry tells Dumbledore that he knows that it was Snape who carried word of the prophecy. Dumbledore defends Snape, saying that he was still under Voldemort¡¦s control and had no way of knowing that Voldemort would kill Harry¡¦s parents. Harry is still outraged and implores Dumbledore to tell him why he trusts Snape. Dumbledore simply does. Harry tells Dumbledore about Draco¡¦s whooping in the Room of Requirement. Dumbledore is once again unconcerned, assuring Harry that Hogwarts will be protected in their absence. Before they leave for the Horcrux, Dumbledore tells Harry that he must follow all orders Dumbledore gives him. Harry leaves to fetch his Invisibility Cloak and finds Ron and Hermione in the common room. He gives them the Marauder¡¦s Map and the bottle of Felix Felicis and tells them to watch Snape and Draco Malfoy and to use special Galleons to contact any members of the D.A. (Dumbledore¡¦s Army, the secret study group formed by Harry and his friends in the previous book to study Defense Against the Dark Arts) who may be able to help. Harry and Dumbledore walk to Hogsmeade together and Apparate to the shore.

The entrance to the cave is concealed, and Dumbledore determines that it requires an offering of blood to open. Dumbledore cuts his hand and drips blood onto the stone, opening the passageway. They reach a small pool of water with a green glow emanating from the center. Harry attempts a Summoning Charm on the green glow, but something very large and white erupts from the water in response. Dumbledore tells Harry that it is there to protect the Horcrux. Standing at the water¡¦s edge, Dumbledore waves his wand and summons a tiny boat on a copper chain. Harry and Dumbledore start sailing toward the green light. Harry sees dead human bodies floating in the water, and Dumbledore tells him that they should not worry about them yet, and that like most creatures that dwell in cold and darkness, they are afraid of warmth and light.

The glow is coming from a stone basin filled with green liquid. Dumbledore conjures a crystal goblet and tells Harry that the green potion must be drunk before they can retrieve the object at the bottom of the basin. Dumbledore tells Harry that it¡¦s his job to see that Dumbledore continues drinking, no matter how painful it is for Dumbledore. Harry hesitates, but Dumbledore reminds him of the conditions of the trip. Dumbledore drinks three and a half goblets of potion before he falls over. Harry gently lifts the goblet to Dumbledore¡¦s lips and pours the remaining liquid down his throat. Harry repeats this process eight times. Dumbledore collapses and mutters for water. Harry tries to use an Aquamenti spell to fill the glass, but the water disappears as soon as Harry brings it to Dumbledore¡¦s mouth. Harry is forced to plunge the goblet into the lake, and the disruption makes the bodies start moving toward the island.

Harry fights them off as best he can, and Dumbledore manages to cause an eruption of fire, which sends the Inferi¡Xthe bodies¡Xback into the water. Dumbledore grabs the locket from the bottom of the stone basin, and he and Harry climb back into Voldemort¡¦s boat and retreat. Harry Apparates back to Hogsmeade with Dumbledore at his side. Dumbledore is extremely weak and unable to walk. He tells Harry that he needs Snape to treat him. Madam Rosmerta, owner of the Three Broomsticks, rushes toward them. The Dark Mark is currently visible over Hogwarts. Dumbledore asks Rosmerta for brooms, and he and Harry fly toward the school. When they arrive at the Astronomy Tower, directly under the Dark Mark, they hear footsteps coming from the opposite direction, and Dumbledore motions for Harry to back off. The door bursts open, and a voice shouts, ¡§Expelliarmus.¡¨ Harry is paralyzed. Although he knows that Expelliarmus is not a freezing charm, Harry realizes that Dumbledore has nonverbally frozen him under his Invisibility Cloak.

The voice turns out to be Draco Malfoy¡¦s. Dumbledore¡¦s wand has been tossed from his body. Draco spots the two brooms and immediately asks who else is in the tower. Dumbledore asks Draco who else he is working with, and Draco tells him there are Death Eaters at Hogwarts, fighting off Dumbledore¡¦s guards down below. Dumbledore tells Draco to get on with it and kill him, but Draco simply stares at Dumbledore. Dumbledore smiles and tells Draco he, Draco, is not a killer, and that his heart is not in it. Draco still does nothing, and Dumbledore notes that Draco is afraid to act alone. Dumbledore asks him how he smuggled Death Eaters into Hogwarts, and Draco tells him he used the Vanishing Cabinet that Montague was lost in last year. Draco explains that there is another Vanishing Cabinet at Borgin and Burkes, and together they make a passageway. With Dumbledore¡¦s prodding, Draco admits to being behind the cursed necklace and poisoned mead. Draco tells Dumbledore that Snape is a double agent and has been lying to Dumbledore. Even now, Dumbledore insists that Snape is trustworthy.

Dumbledore infers that Draco put Rosmerta under an Imperius Curse and had her wait in the bathroom with the necklace. Dumbledore then tells Draco that if Draco were really going to kill him, he would have done it by now. Draco responds by telling Dumbledore that he doesn¡¦t have any options, and that Voldemort will kill Draco and his family if he doesn¡¦t complete the murder. Dumbledore is sympathetic and tells Draco that the Order can help him hide. Draco lowers his wand. Suddenly, four Death Eaters burst through the door. They all command Draco to finish Dumbledore, but Draco still does not move. Snape bursts through the door, and, for the first time, Dumbledore looks frightened. Snape raises his wand and shoots a blast of green light straight at Dumbledore. The force throws Dumbledore out the window to fall to the ground below.

The freezing spell cast over Harry is broken, and he rushes down the stairs after Snape and Draco. Harry runs, dodging curses and bodies and hexing Amycus, who is trying to kill Ginny. Harry sees Ron, Professor McGonagall, and Lupin each battling a Death Eater. Harry sprints past his confused schoolmates toward Snape, Draco, and a large blond Death Eater. Harry sees Hagrid emerge from his cabin and attempt to stop the Death Eaters from fleeing the grounds. Harry is struck from behind by a curse and waits on the ground for his attackers to near. Harry strikes back, knocking them both down, then keeps running. Hagrid is fighting the blond Death Eater, and Snape and Draco are rushing toward the gates, where they will be able to Disapparate. Harry aims at Snape and misses. The blond Death Eater sets Hagrid¡¦s house on fire. Snape tells Draco to keep running and turns to face Harry. Snape does not fight back, and Harry screams at him, calling him a coward. Harry is suddenly hit and falls over. He hears Snape¡¦s voice shouting ¡§No!¡¨ and telling Harry¡¦s attacker that Harry is to be saved for the Dark Lord.

Harry no longer cares whether he lives or dies and staggers toward Snape, but Snape dodges his curses once more. Harry attempts a Levicorpus curse, but Snape deflects him. On the ground again, Snape moves toward Harry, crouching over his fallen body. Snape tells Harry that he, Snape, is the Half-Blood Prince, and that Harry should not use his own spells on him, as Harry¡¦s father did. Harry dares Snape to kill him and calls him a coward once more. Snape stuns Harry and runs toward the gates, where he and Draco Disapparate. Harry struggles to sit up and yells for Hagrid. Hagrid rushes over and scoops Harry into his arms. Together, they use the Aquamenti spell to put out the fire in Hagrid¡¦s house. Harry tells Hagrid that Snape killed Dumbledore. Hagrid does not believe Harry and leads him back to Hogwarts, where the students are assembling on the lawn, still unsure what has happened.

Hagrid spots the Dark Mark over the Astronomy Tower and notices a body lying in the grass¡XDumbledore. Harry is silent as he straightens Dumbledore¡¦s spectacles and wipes away the trickle of blood coming from his mouth. A crowd gathers behind Harry. Harry spots the locket they took from the cave, which has fallen from Dumbledore¡¦s pocket, and he picks it up. The locket is not as large as Slytherin¡¦s, nor does it bear his mark. When Harry opens it, he finds a small piece of parchment with a note written to Voldemort. The note¡¦s author, who signs his or her name ¡§R. A. B.,¡¨ tells Voldemort that he has discovered his secret, stolen the Horcrux, and intends to destroy it as soon as he can. The author tells Voldemort that he or she hopes that when Voldemort meets his match, he will simply be a mortal man. Harry does not understand the message, nor does he care. Harry only knows that whoever stole the real Horcrux contributed to Dumbledore¡¦s death, causing him to weaken himself by drinking a horrible potion for nothing.

Ginny grabs Harry¡¦s hand and gently tugs him back. Harry asks her who else is dead, and Ginny says that Bill was badly hurt by Fenir Greyback, but no one is dead. They reach the hospital wing. Neville is asleep, and Ron, Hermione, Luna, Tonks, and Lupin are gathered around another bed, where Bill Weasley is lying, his face unrecognizable. Madam Pomfrey tells Harry that no charms will cure his disfigurement. Ron asks if Bill is a werewolf now, and Lupin tells him that because Greyback was not transformed when he attacked, Bill will probably not be a true werewolf. Still, Lupin does caution that there could be some contamination. Ginny tells the group that Dumbledore is dead. Lupin collapses, and Tonks asks how it happened. Harry tells them about Snape. Outside, Dumbledore¡¦s Phoenix is singing.

The group stands in silence. Professor McGonagall walks in and tells everyone that the Weasleys are on their way. Harry repeats the news. McGonagall is shocked, and Lupin and Tonks both speculate on what it was about Snape that made Dumbledore trust him so deeply. Mr. and Mrs. Weasley and Fleur rush in. When Mrs. Weasley sees Bill¡¦s face, she screams and starts to cry. Mrs. Weasley assumes that Fleur will no longer wish to marry Bill, but Fleur is offended and tells her that she still intends to marry him. Tonks glares at Lupin and tells him that just because someone is a werewolf doesn¡¦t mean they cannot be loved. Harry realizes that Tonks has been in love with Lupin, not Sirius. Hagrid enters and tells Professor McGonagall that he has moved the body and alerted the Ministry. McGonagall asks Hagrid to tell the Heads of House to meet her in her office.

Professor McGonagall asks Harry what he and Dumbledore had been doing that evening, but Harry tells her he cannot betray Dumbledore¡¦s confidence. Professor Slughorn, Sprout, and Flitwick enter the office with Hagrid. Moments later, one of Dumbledore¡¦s portraits tells Professor McGonagall that Scrimgeour has left the Ministry and will be at Hogwarts shortly. McGonagall tells the group that she is not certain Hogwarts should reopen next year. Harry asks about Dumbledore¡¦s funeral, and the faculty agrees that he should be buried on the grounds and that students should be allowed to attend. Harry walks through the common room without saying a word to anyone. Ron asks Harry if he and Dumbledore succeeded in getting a Horcrux, and Harry tells him no. Classes and examinations are suspended. Hermione tells Harry that Eileen Prince was Snape¡¦s mother, which is why Snape called himself the Half-Blood Prince.

The day of Dumbledore¡¦s funeral, Hagrid carries Dumbledore¡¦s body, wrapped in purple cloth, down the aisle. Harry cannot hold back his tears any longer. Harry thinks of how many people have tried to protect him and died while doing it: his father, his mother, his godfather, and Dumbledore. After the funeral, Harry tells Ginny that they cannot be together because Voldemort will eventually use her to get to him. Ginny is upset but understands. Harry walks back to the castle. Ron and Hermione catch up, and they speculate on whether the school will close. Harry tells them that he¡¦s not coming back. Harry will spend the summer with the Dursleys per Dumbledore¡¦s wishes and return to Godric¡¦s Hollow, where his Wizarding life started. Harry also wishes to visit the graves of his parents. After that, Harry will begin his search for the remaining Horcruxes. Ron and Hermione tell Harry that they will accompany him to the Dursleys and will stay by his side from there on. Ron reminds them that they need to return to the Burrow for Bill and Fleur¡¦s wedding. Knowing that the future holds a long and difficult journey, Harry enjoys one last moment of peace with his two best friends.