Snape and the Death Eater Yaxley meet outside of Lucius Malfoy¡¦s house and proceed inside, taking seats at a table where Voldemort and his followers are already assembled. A bound figure dangles upside down above the center of the table, hanging by a rope.

Snape tells Voldemort that Harry Potter is to be moved from his place of safety on the next Saturday at nightfall. Yaxley claims that he has heard contradictory intelligence, and that Harry is to be moved later, on the thirtieth of the month. Voldemort indicates that he knows the source of Snape¡¦s intelligence, and he makes it plain that he believes Snape rather than Yaxley.

Yaxley, still seeking Voldemort¡¦s approval, reveals that he has corrupted a member of the Ministry of Magic, a wizard named Pius Thicknesse. Yaxley reports that several Death Eaters are also positioned within the department of Magical Transport, making them better able to track Harry if he tries to travel by magical means. Voldemort announces that he plans to capture Harry while he is being transported.

A loud wailing, seemingly arising from below the floor, interrupts the gathering. Voldemort sends Wormtail out of the room to quiet ¡§the prisoner¡¨ (presumably not the one above the table, since the sound comes from below and Wormtail has to leave the room to quiet the prisoner in question).

Harry stumbles out of his room at the Dursleys¡¦ house, clutching his bleeding hand. On his way to the bathroom he steps on a cup of tea inexplicably left outside of his bedroom door. After treating his finger and cleaning up the broken tea cup, he returns to his room, where he has spent the morning sorting the belongings in his school trunk into things he¡¦ll no longer need, and a smaller pile of things he will keep with him now that he¡¦s left Hogwarts and is about to leave the Dursleys¡¦. He has just cut his finger on a shard of the mirror that Sirius gave him in Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix, of which all that now remains is the single shard.

Harry reads two newspaper articles commemorating Albus Dumbledore. ¡§Albus Dumbledore Remembered,¡¨ by Dumbledore¡¦s schoolmate and longtime friend, Elphias Doge, describes Dumbledore¡¦s brilliant career at school, despite his having a father imprisoned at Azkaban for attacking Muggles; his relationship with his less intellectual younger brother, Aberforth; his struggles following the deaths of his mother and sister; his triumph over the Dark wizard Grindelwald in a famous duel in 1945; and his brilliant career as headmaster. Harry feels regret that he knew so little of what there was to know about Dumbledore¡¦s life and wishes he¡¦d asked Dumbledore about himself.

The second article is an interview with the journalist Rita Skeeter, who has just written a biography of Dumbledore called The Life and Lies of Albus Dumbledore. In the interview, Skeeter indicates that her book debunks the supposed accomplishments that Dumbledore is famous for, reveals dark secrets about his family, and depicts Dumbledore¡¦s relationship with Harry Potter in a sinister and unhealthy light. Disgusted by Skeeter¡¦s lies, Harry puts down the paper.

Harry picks up the broken mirror shard, turning it in his hands as he thinks bitterly about Rita Skeeter¡¦s lies. He catches a flash of bright blue in the shard, which reminds him of Dumbledore¡¦s blue eyes. He decides he must have imagined it, because there¡¦s nothing blue in the room that it could have been reflecting.

Harry¡¦s uncle Vernon summons Harry from his room. Harry goes downstairs to find all three Dursleys¡XUncle Vernon, Aunt Petunia, and Dudley¡Xsitting in the living room dressed for traveling. Uncle Vernon announces that he¡¦s changed his mind: He doesn¡¦t believe Harry that Uncle Vernon and the Dursleys are in danger, and he¡¦s not going into hiding with the help of the Order of the Phoenix. Repeating a discussion they¡¦ve had many times already, Harry explains that once he turns seventeen, the protection charm that keeps them all safe will break, and Voldemort and the Death Eaters will torture and kill the Dursleys. The Ministry of Magic cannot protect them because the Death Eaters have already infiltrated it.

Dudley breaks in and announces that he¡¦s going to go with the representatives of the Order, so Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia have no choice but to acquiesce as well. Hestia Jones and Dedalus Diggle, members of the Order of the Phoenix, arrive to take the Dursleys into hiding. Dudley surprises his own family and Harry by inquiring where Harry is going to go. He surprises them even further by declaring that, in contrast to what Harry believes the Dursleys think of him, he does not consider Harry to be ¡§a waste of space,¡¨ and declares that Harry saved his life. Harry realizes that Dudley actually is grateful for Harry¡¦s saving him from the dementor that had attacked him the summer before, and that the tea cup outside his bedroom must have been put there by Dudley in a clumsy attempt at solicitude. Harry shakes hands with Dudley, and the Dursleys depart.

Harry looks around at the house, remembering sadly his younger self and the life he led in that place. Suddenly, an unexpectedly large contingent of wizards arrives in the backyard to escort Harry to his new place of safety. Hagrid is there, as well as Ron, Hermione, Fleur Delacour, Mad-Eye Moody, Fred and George Weasley, Bill Weasley, Arthur Weasley, Remus Lupin, Tonks, Kingsley, and Mundungus Fletcher. Moody announces that they¡¦ve had to change plans because Pius Thicknesse has gone over to Voldemort and all Ministry-regulated means of transportation are dangerous to them.

Moody¡¦s new plan is to send Harry to Tonks¡¦s parents¡¦ house while six decoys go to other houses. Ron, Hermione, Fred, George, Fleur, and Mundungus will take Polyjuice Potion to disguise themselves as Harry, and each of them will fly with one escort. Harry protests at putting his friends in danger by using them as decoys, but since everyone accepts the risk, he reluctantly agrees. Harry provides hairs for the potion, which the six designated decoys take, changing them into copies of Harry. Harry gets into the sidecar of a flying motorbike driven by Hagrid, and the entire party rises into the air.

Almost immediately, Harry and Hagrid find themselves surrounded by at least thirty hooded Death Eaters. They flee, with the Death Eaters in hot pursuit, shooting Killing Curses at them, one of which kills Harry¡¦s owl, Hedwig. Harry tries to fend their pursuers off with spells, but when Hagrid shoots dragon fire out of the back of the motorbike, the sidecar splits off. Harry recognizes Stan Shunpike as one of the pursuers, and a Death Eater whom he does not recognize somehow identifies Harry as the real Harry Potter. The Death Eaters immediately depart, but quickly return with Voldemort himself, who is intent on killing Harry personally. Hagrid leaps onto a Death Eater¡¦s broom and crashes to the ground. Threatened by Voldemort at close range, Harry feels his wand hand come up involuntarily and deliver a warding spell he doesn¡¦t even recognize or know how to cast, shattering Voldemort¡¦s wand, then Harry crashes the bike into a pond.

Harry wakes up, the injuries he sustained in the chase healed. He finds that he¡¦s at Tonks¡¦s parents¡¦ house, and that Ted Tonks has healed both him and Hagrid. The protective charm on the house kept Voldemort and the Death Eaters from following them inside its boundaries. Harry promises to send Mr. Tonks word when he finds out what happened to Tonks (the daughter), and they use a Portkey to travel to the Burrow, the Weasley family home.

Hagrid and Harry find an anxious Mrs. Weasley awaiting them at the Burrow. None of the others who helped transport Harry has arrived yet. Lupin arrives with George Weasley, who has had his ear cut off by a curse from Snape, who was among the attackers. Realizing that they must have been betrayed, Lupin tests whether Harry is who he appears to be by asking what animal was in the room when Harry first met him in his office. Harry answers correctly that it was a grindylow. Lupin and Harry discuss how Harry must have revealed to the Death Eaters that he was the real Harry when he cast a Disarming spell on Stan Shunpike, not wanting to do mortal harm to a pursuer who may be under mind control. Lupin urges Harry to stop pulling punches, particularly when Disarming seems to have become Harry¡¦s predictable signature spell. Kingsley and Hermione arrive safely, then Mr. Weasley and Fred, then Ron and Tonks, then Bill and Fleur. Bill and Fleur describe how they saw Mundungus Fletcher panic and Disapparate, leaving Mad-Eye to die by Voldemort¡¦s curse, right at the beginning of the chase.

The entire party discusses how their plans might have been betrayed to Voldemort, noting that Voldemort apparently did not know of the plan to use the six Harry decoys. Harry wants to leave the Burrow, frustrated that his presence puts his allies in danger, but his friends won¡¦t hear of it.

Harry wishes he could put Mad-Eye Moody¡¦s death behind him by embarking on his quest to destroy the Horcruxes¡Xthe objects into which Voldemort has placed fragments of his soul, making him immortal as long as those objects survive. Harry wants to discuss the quest with Ron and Hermione, who agreed to accompany him in the previous book, but Mrs. Weasley interferes, first by approaching each of them in turn and trying to dissuade them from leaving Hogwarts, then by keeping them busy and apart from each other by having them help her prepare the house for the wedding of Bill Weasley and Fleur. Finally the three friends steal a moment to meet in Ron¡¦s room, and Ron and Hermione reveal the lengths they¡¦ve gone to in preparing for the quest.

Hermione has enchanted her Muggle (non-wizard) parents into changing their names, forgetting that they have a daughter, and moving to Australia so that Voldemort will not be able to find them. Ron has given the household ghoul a pair of his own pajamas and enchanted the ghoul with red hair and pustules, so that when Ron fails to return to Hogwarts, his parents can give out the information that he¡¦s ill with an infectious disease called spattergroit, which would cause him to look somewhat like the enchanted ghoul does. Anyone who checks in on Ron will see the ghoul in his bed, assume that Ron¡¦s really sick, and flee before becoming infected.

Most important, Hermione reveals that she used a spell to steal the books on Horcruxes, which Dumbledore had removed from the library for safekeeping, out of Dumbledore¡¦s office after he died. She explains that Voldemort is unlikely to try to reassemble his own soul by destroying the Horcruxes himself, because doing so requires that the person who made the Horcruxes suffer the pain of remorse for their actions, which seems contrary to Voldemort¡¦s nature. But for Harry and his friends to destroy them will be very difficult, because only very destructive and dangerous items, such as the basilisk¡¦s fang that Harry used to destroy Tom Riddle¡¦s diary (the first of the Horcruxes) in Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets, can be sure to do the job.

Mr. and Mrs. Delacour, Fleur¡¦s parents, arrive, and Harry feels guilty about the strain that his presence, and the added security, is putting on Mrs. Weasley.

The crowd panics and flees. Masked and cloaked figures appear¡Xthe Death Eaters. Harry, Ron, and Hermione join hands and Disapparate (teleport) under Hermione¡¦s direction. They arrive in Tottenham Court Road, a busy street in London, in the Muggle rather than the wizarding world.

Though they have been forced to flee the Weasley household with no notice, Hermione reveals that they are better prepared than Ron and Harry think, because Hermione has packed clothes, Harry¡¦s Invisibility Cloak, all the books they might need, a magic tent, their supply of Polyjuice Potion, and many other things, all in a tiny beaded handbag that takes up little space and weighs nothing.

The three friends go to a cafe to plan their next move, debating where they might go now that Voldemort has taken over the Ministry. Two burly workmen suddenly pull out wands and attack them, revealing themselves to be Death Eaters. Harry, Ron, and Hermione fight these attackers off with difficulty, having no idea how the Death Eaters could have found them so quickly, or how to evade them better in future.

Harry and his friends decide to go to Number Twelve Grimmauld Place, the house that Sirius Black left to Harry in his will. They can only hope that the jinxes and charms on the house will be enough to hide them from Snape and the other Death Eaters. Inside the house, small signs, such as a knocked-over umbrella stand, give Harry and the others the impression that someone has been in the house, but it appears to be empty now. Suddenly they feel their tongues raveling and then unraveling, the effect of a Tongue-Tying charm Mad-Eye Moody put upon the house to prevent them from revealing its secrets. (Snape, as a trusted friend of Dumbledore¡¦s, has entered the house before and so may be able to do so again, but Mad-Eye¡¦s spell should prevent Snape from telling anyone else about it.)

Harry feels a burning pain in his scar and vicariously experiences Voldemort¡¦s rage¡Xthe connection between their minds is apparently opening up again. Ron badgers Harry about what Voldemort is doing, fearful that Voldemort has attacked Ron¡¦s family, while Hermione scolds Harry for exposing himself to a dangerous connection that he had previously worked so hard to close using the technique of Occlumency.

Ron¡¦s father¡¦s Patronus arrives to say that the family is safe but being watched. Sick with the painful sensation in his scar, Harry excuses himself and goes to the bathroom so he can have his vision in peace. Harry sees through Voldemort¡¦s eyes as Voldemort tortures one of the Death Eaters who attacked them in the cafe, punishing him for summoning Voldemort but then letting Harry escape.

As August wears on, the house itself remains unseen, but watchers in cloaks continue to loiter outside number twelve Grimmauld Place. During this time, Kreacher transforms himself into an extremely productive and helpful house-elf, cleaning, cooking, and keeping himself washed.

From the newspapers, Harry and his friends learn that Snape has been confirmed as headmaster of Hogwarts, and that two new professors have joined the staff. These siblings, the Amycus and Alecto Carrow, are both Death Eaters.

Hermione remembers that the portrait of Phineas Nigellus Black that hangs in the house allows the Phineas within the painting to move between the painting in number twelve Grimmauld Place and the painting of him that hangs in the headmaster¡¦s office at Hogwarts (Phineas is a former headmaster). Hermione takes the picture down and puts it in her bag so that it won¡¦t be able to spy on them and report their secrets to Snape.

Harry, Ron, and Hermione begin stalking Ministry of Magic employees, using the Invisibility Cloak to study the patterns of movement in and out of the Ministry so they can try to infiltrate it and look for the locket in Umbridge¡¦s office. Earlier than the others expect, Harry announces that they are as ready as they¡¦re going to be, and they should try to break in the next day.

At dinner that night, Harry¡¦s scar burns, and he has to excuse himself to go have a vision of Voldemort in the privacy of the bathroom. Through Voldemort¡¦s eyes, he sees Voldemort knock on a door¡Xsomewhere in Europe where the houses have decorated gables¡Xand ask for Gregorovitch. On being told by the woman who answers that she doesn¡¦t know where Gregorovitch is, Voldemort kills the woman in front of her young children¡Xand perhaps kills the children as well; the vision is unclear.

Hermione yells at Harry for allowing Voldemort to get into his head again. Harry tells his friends that Voldemort must be looking for Gregorovitch for answers about how Harry¡¦s wand defeated Voldemort, because Harry knows it was no ability of his own that let him fight Voldemort off during the chase.

Harry opens his eyes and finds himself in a forest. Hermione and Ron are there, but Ron is bleeding profusely, a huge chunk of his side missing. Hermione explains that he has been Splinched, meaning he left a part of himself behind while Disapparating. They treat his wound with a potion from Hermione¡¦s bag, and Hermione tells Harry how she had taken them to Grimmauld Place, but Yaxley had grabbed hold of her so that she inadvertently took Yaxley with them, within the perimeter of the house¡¦s protective enchantments. She was then able to slip out of Yaxley¡¦s grip and bring them to these woods¡Xthe site of the Quidditch World Cup the year before¡Xbut now that Yaxley has gained entry to the house, they can no longer go back there.

Harry and Hermione set up the tent and cast protective charms on it, then they consider their situation. They do have the Horcrux, as Hermione had succeeded in taking the locket from Umbridge. As they are unable to open it and have no idea how to destroy it, all Harry can think to do for the moment is to wear it on a chain around his neck for safekeeping. Moreover, they have no idea where to start looking for any of the other Horcruxes, and they have little or nothing to eat while they try to figure it out.

Harry¡¦s scar prickles and he sees through Voldemort¡¦s eyes as Voldemort interrogates the wand maker Gregorovitch. Gregorovitch insists that he does not have what Voldemort wants, as it was stolen from him long ago. Voldemort, thinking he¡¦s lying, reads his mind and sees a memory of a young, handsome blond man stealing the wand, stunning Gregorovitch with a spell, and escaping through a window. Voldemort draws back out of Gregorovitch¡¦s mind, Gregorovitch screams, and there is a flash of green light as Voldemort kills Gregorovitch.

Hermione does not want to hear about Harry¡¦s vision, being angry at his letting it occur. Harry describes it to Ron, saying that the vision makes no sense. Why would Voldemort kill Gregorovitch, when surely Voldemort must have visited him because he wanted Gregorovitch to make a new, more powerful wand that could defeat Harry? Yet Voldemort made no mention of such a desire.

Harry reflects that the mischievous-looking blond youth must be Voldemort¡¦s next target. Harry thinks he¡¦s seen this man before, but can¡¦t think where.

Hermione remains angry at Ron, but Ron and Harry feel much more optimistic now that they¡¦ve destroyed one Horcrux. Ron tells Harry that a magical Trace has been placed on Voldemort¡¦s name, so that anyone who says it can be tracked by the Ministry. This Trace is how the trio were discovered in Tottenham Court Road. Fortunately, Harry and Hermione have already slipped into the habit of calling Voldemort You-Know-Who.

Hermione announces that she wants to visit Xenophilius Lovegood, having found, in the signature of the letter from Dumbledore excerpted in Skeeter¡¦s book, yet another appearance of the triangular symbol associated with Grindelwald and worn by Xenophilius. Ron concurs, noting that Xenophilius¡¦s underground newspaper, The Quibbler, has been staunchly pro-Harry, despite the price on his head.

The trio find the tower where the Lovegoods live, but Xenophilius seems alarmed at their presence and reluctant to invite them in or help them. Grudgingly, he lets them come in. Ron chides Xenophilius for printing in his newspaper that people should help Harry, then appearing unwilling to help Harry himself, and finally Xenophilius agrees to help. He excuses himself to go call Luna, who, he says, is outside fishing, then serves them a nasty-tasting root infusion. Xenophilius asks Harry what he has come for, and Harry inquires about the symbol. Xenophilius tells him that it is the sign of the Deathly Hallows.

Harry, Ron, and Hermione are all baffled¡Xnone of them have heard of the Deathly Hallows. Xenophilius explains that the Deathly Hallows have nothing to do with Dark Magic, and that the symbol is merely a way for wizards to indicate to each other that they believe in a particular legend and are engaged in a quest for certain objects¡Xthe Deathly Hallows. To explain what these objects are, Xenophilius has Hermione read an old and familiar fairy tale from The Tales of Beedle the Bard.

Three brothers were traveling on a road when they came to a river. They made a bridge using magic, but when they were halfway across, Death spoke to them. Death was angry at being cheated of their lives, but he congratulated them and offered them each a prize. The oldest brother asked for a wand that would always win duels, and Death fashioned one out of an elder tree branch. The second asked for the power to bring people back from the dead, and Death gave him a stone with that power. The youngest brother asked for something that would let him leave that place without being followed by Death, and Death reluctantly handed over his own Invisibility Cloak.

The three brothers departed. The first brother was killed in his sleep by a thief after he boasted about his wand. The second brother summoned the spirit of a girl he had once loved, but she couldn¡¦t truly be with him in life, so he killed himself to join her. The youngest brother lived for many years, then handed the cloak off to his own son and welcomed Death like an old friend.

Hermione points her wand at Harry¡¦s face and causes it to swell so that he¡¦s unrecognizable, just before the three friends are seized by a gang of Snatchers. Harry can¡¦t see, but he recognizes one of the voices menacing Hermione as belonging to Fenrir Greyback, the werewolf. Questioned about their names, Harry claims to be Vernon Dudley, Ron to be Barny Weasley (after having been caught in the lie that he was Stan Shunpike), and Hermione to be Penelope Clearwater.

As the Snatchers go to check their names against lists of wanted persons, leaving the prisoners bound together, Harry and his friends discover that Dean Thomas, their fellow Gryffindor, is bound with them. Dean tells them that these Snatchers are merely looking for truant Hogwarts students to sell to the Ministry for gold.

The Snatchers return, not having found the names they gave on their lists. Harry is able to lie convincingly that he is a Slytherin and that his father works in the Ministry, but the Snatchers realize who they¡¦ve actually caught when they match Hermione to a picture of her in the newspaper, which states that Hermione is known to be traveling with Harry Potter, then discover the Sword of Gryffindor and Harry¡¦s glasses. Throughout this ordeal, Harry has trouble staying in the present moment, as he keeps having visions through Voldemort¡¦s eyes of Voldemort flying to the top of a black fortress¡XNurmengard. The Snatchers decide to take the prisoners to Malfoy Manor, Voldemort¡¦s base of operations, and as they go there, Harry has visions of Voldemort interrogating Grindelwald in his cell at Nurmengard.

At the manor, Narcissa and Lucius Malfoy try to get Draco to positively identify Harry, whose face is still unrecognizably swollen, but Draco, fearful and reluctant, won¡¦t commit. Narcissa and Lucius think it is Harry, because they can identify Hermione and Ron, but they don¡¦t want to contact Voldemort without being sure. Bellatrix Lestrange enters the room, and though at first she seems ready to contact Voldemort herself and end the dispute, when she discovers the Sword of Gryffindor, which she had thought safe in her own vault at Gringotts, she tells Narcissa and Lucius that they are all in mortal danger, and she has Harry and Ron thrown into the dark basement so she can interrogate Hermione and plan her next move.

As Bellatrix tortures Hermione to learn where they got the sword, accusing her of breaking into Bellatrix¡¦s Gringotts vault, Harry and Ron discover that the basement also holds Luna, Ollivander the wandmaker, Dean Thomas, and Griphook, a Gringotts goblin. Luna has a nail that she uses to untie them, and Ron uses his Deluminator to light the basement. As they hear Hermione screaming in pain, Harry desperately looks for a way to escape. Finding none, he empties his pouch, looking for something that might aid him, and he finds the shard of Sirius¡¦s magic mirror. Dumbledore¡¦s eye is looking out of it at Harry. Harry asks the eye for help, and it disappears.

The prisoners hear Hermione claiming that the sword is only a fake, and then Bellatrix stating her intention to question the Gringotts goblin. Harry asks Griphook to lie and say the sword they were carrying is a fake, then they turn out the lights, just as Malfoy comes down to bring Griphook to Bellatrix.

Griphook agrees to help them break into Bellatrix Lestrange¡¦s Gringotts vault, but he demands the Sword of Gryffindor as payment. This puts Harry and his friends in a bind, because if they refuse, they¡¦ll never get into the vault to look for a Horcrux, but if they give up the sword, they¡¦ll have no way to destroy any Horcrux they find. Harry decides to trick the goblin, telling him he can have the sword after they break into the vault, but not specifying how long after. Feeling somewhat guilty, Harry gives his promise to Griphook, and for several weeks they plan the break-in.

Lupin arrives at the cottage with the news that Tonks has had her baby. He asks Harry to be the godfather, and Harry agrees.

Before Harry and the others embark on their mission, Bill takes Harry aside. He does not know what Harry is planning to do or how Griphook is involved, but he warns Harry to be careful of goblins. He says that goblins are deeply distrustful of wizards, believing that wizards do not respect agreements involving treasure and tend to trample on goblin rights. He explains that goblins believe manufactured items belong to the maker, and that ownership of goblin-made goods should not pass from wizard to wizard but should revert to the goblins after the first owner¡¦s death. He warns Harry of the dangers of reneging on a deal with a goblin.

To break into Gringotts, Hermione disguises herself as Bellatrix Lestrange and changes Ron¡¦s appearance so he¡¦s unrecognizable. With Harry and Griphook under the Invisibility Cloak, the four go to Diagon Alley, where they see witches and wizards begging in the streets, deprived of their wands by the Ministry.

A Death Eater named Travers stops Hermione/Bellatrix, noting that he¡¦d heard she¡¦d been confined to her house and lost her wand, but Hermione dismisses his questions contemptuously, in a good imitation of Bellatrix¡¦s manner. Unfortunately, Travers is going to Gringotts too, and they enter the bank together.

The first security obstacle they face is Probity Probes¡Xrods that detect the presence of Concealment spells and magical items. Harry sneaks up in his cloak and zaps the guards working the probes with spells of Confusion.

Harry, Ron, and Hermione appear in Hogsmeade, but their appearance triggers a magical alarm that sounds like loud screaming. A dozen Death Eaters burst out of the Three Broomsticks pub in search of them. Though they remain under the Invisibility Cloak, they have nowhere to hide, and they infer from the Death Eaters¡¦ comments that enchantments will keep them from teleporting away again. The Death Eaters unleash dementors in search of them, and Harry summons his Patronus, potentially giving their position away.

Before the Death Eaters can find them, however, a door opens in a house on the street, and a rough voice summons them inside and into a room above the Hog¡¦s Head Inn. Still cloaked, they look out the window down at the street below, where the man who saved them¡Xwhom Harry recognizes as the Hog¡¦s Head barman¡Xargues with the Death Eaters. The man claims that it was he who set off the alarm, letting his cat out after curfew. He claims that the Patronus was his own goat Patronus, not Harry¡¦s stag, and points out that Voldemort won¡¦t want to be summoned over a cat. Mindful that the Hog¡¦s Head bar is a convenient place for them to trade black market goods, the Death Eaters leave him alone.

Harry recognizes the man¡¦s blue eyes as those he¡¦s been seeing through the magic mirror, and he realizes that this man must be Aberforth, Dumbledore¡¦s brother, and that Aberforth was the one who sent Dobby. Aberforth acknowledges that he¡¦s been trying to keep an eye on Harry, though it was not he who led them to the sword.

Aberforth tries to convince Harry that Voldemort has already won, and that Harry should abandon his quest¡Xwhatever it is¡Xand leave the country, before he meets Dumbledore¡¦s fate. He reminds them of his brother Dumbledore¡¦s penchant for lies and secrecy, and says that many of those Dumbledore loved and cared for turned out to be worse off than if he¡¦d left them alone.

Hermione guesses that Aberforth is talking about his sister, Ariana, and prods him into giving them the real story of what happened to her. Ariana was not a Squib, as Rita Skeeter claimed. When she was six years old, as her magic was beginning to manifest itself but before she could control it, she was observed doing magic by three much older Muggle boys, who attacked her in some unspecified way, leaving her permanently unhinged. Dumbledore¡¦s father was imprisoned in Azkaban for attacking these boys, and Dumbledore¡¦s early flirtation with the idea of wizards dominating Muggles stemmed from anger at what had happened to his sister and father, coupled with a wish to create a world in which his sister would not have to hide.

Dumbledore returned home when his mother, Kendra, died and took responsibility for Ariana. He met Grindelwald, and the two began hatching grand plans to change the world, wanting to set off as soon as possible. Aberforth confronted them, pointing out that Ariana was in no fit state to travel or be left alone, so they had no way to do whatever it was they wanted to do. As the argument grew heated, Aberforth drew his wand, and Grindelwald used the Cruciatus (torturing) curse on him. As the three fought, Ariana came to intervene, and one of the curses the three wizards were hurling at each other killed her. Grindelwald left immediately, and Dumbledore was free to embark on his career.
has a vision of Voldemort receiving the summons. Luna Stuns Alecto, knocking her out and waking the Ravenclaw students, who enter the common room. Amycus pounds on the door, but he¡¦s too stupid to answer the doorknocker¡¦s next question, and can¡¦t get in. Harry slips into Voldemort¡¦s mind and sees that Voldemort has decided to check on his locket Horcrux before coming to Hogwarts, giving Harry a little extra time.

Professor McGonagall arrives outside the room and lets Amycus in. Harry and Luna have recloaked, and Amycus sees only his Stunned sister on the floor. His chief worry is that they will be punished for giving a false alarm, and he muses aloud that he can blame the summons on the Ravenclaw students, so Voldemort may be satisfied with killing a few of them. When Professor McGonagall stands up to Amycus defiantly, he spits in her face, prompting Harry to step out of the Cloak and deliver a Cruciatus Curse at Amycus.

Professor McGonagall urges Harry to flee, but when he explains that he is looking for the lost diadem of Ravenclaw on Dumbledore¡¦s orders, she says that the teachers will secure the school from Voldemort while he searches. Visions of Voldemort reveal to Harry that Voldemort has discovered that his locket is missing and is on his way to the school.

Harry and Professor McGonagall quickly make a plan to alert the other heads of houses and evacuate any students unwilling or too young to fight against Voldemort. They are on their way to alert the heads, with Harry and Luna hidden under the cloak, when they meet Severus Snape in the hallway. When Snape demands to know if McGonagall has seen Harry Potter, she attacks him, and they duel. McGonagall holds Snape at bay, and he is finally forced to take flight when Professors Sprout and Flitwick run up to aid her. Snape leaps from the window and flies away on huge, batlike wings.

Professor McGonagall organizes the other professors in establishing magical defenses and evacuating students, putting to work those students who can help defend the school, 
including Dumbledore¡¦s Army. Lupin and the entire Weasley family enter the school in order to help, with Percy apologizing for being a pro-Ministry prig and Lupin showing pictures of his and Tonks¡¦s baby.

Ginny Weasley tells Harry that Ron and Hermione said something about heading to a bathroom. Harry starts to look for them when he has a vision of Voldemort arriving at the school gates, Nagini draped across his shoulders.

Giant spiders from the Forbidden Forest enter the school, fighting on the side of the Death Eaters, as Harry, Ron, and the Weasleys try to move Fred¡¦s body to a safe place. Ron wants to stay and fight to avenge his brother, but Hermione urges him to focus on the goal: to destroy Nagini, the last known Horcrux. Harry uses his ability to see through Voldemort¡¦s eyes to find out where he is, and has a vision of Voldemort in the Shrieking Shack in Hogsmeade ordering Lucius Malfoy, who is frantic with worry about Draco, to go fetch Snape.

They head toward the Whomping Willow to enter the passageway to the Shrieking Shack, on the way fighting off attacking Death Eaters and saving Draco Malfoy¡¦s life from a Death Eater who mistakes him for an enemy. Before they reach the Willow, they see that giants have joined the fight on both sides, and they have to fight off a hundred dementors, with some help from Luna, Ernie, and Seamus, who have mastered the art of summoning Patronuses.

Harry, Ron, and Hermione enter the passage and creep to where they can observe what¡¦s happening in the Shrieking Shack. Voldemort is telling Snape that the Elder Wand is working no better than his old wand and has not given him the extraordinary powers it was supposed to. Voldemort concludes that he is not yet the true master of the Elder Wand, because Snape killed its previous owner, and thus Voldemort must kill Snape to be the wand¡¦s master. Voldemort orders Nagini to kill Snape, and the great snake bites Snape¡¦s neck, mortally wounding him. Voldemort leaves.

Harry goes to Snape¡¦s body, and Snape, dying, tells Harry to ¡§Take it,¡¨ and expels a silvery substance from his mouth, nose, and ears. Harry collects the substance in a flask that Hermione provides, and Snape, after telling Harry to look at him, dies.

Voldemort addresses the school, telling them that he will give them a one-hour reprieve to dispose of their dead and treat the wounded. He announces that Harry should meet him alone in the Forbidden Forest in one hour, or Voldemort will recommence the battle, enter the fray himself, and kill every person who helped Harry.

In the Great Hall of Hogwarts, those who have died fighting for Harry are laid out. Among the dead are Lupin and Tonks.

Harry, though filled with dread, accepts that he has to die. He sees that Dumbledore knew him well enough to know that he would sacrifice himself willingly if he could save the lives of others. He notes that Dumbledore overestimated him, because the snake remains undestroyed, but he trusts that someone else can manage to kill the snake, now that Ron and Hermione know how.

Harry puts on the Invisibility Cloak and goes downstairs, almost running into Neville, who is helping carry in the dead body of Colin Creevey, the younger boy who had long idolized Harry. Harry avoids encountering any of his other friends, but goes up to Neville and gives him the information that the snake Nagini must be destroyed, in case anything happens to Ron and Hermione. So if the chance presents itself, and Neville happens to think of it . . . he should kill the snake.

Harry gradually comes into consciousness, naked. He opens his eyes and finds himself in an unformed, dreamlike place. He hears something pitiful yet unseemly flapping and thumping. He wishes for clothes, and robes appear before him, which he puts on. He sees that he is in a great hall. He sees a small, naked child, looking like it¡¦s been beaten and stuffed out of sight, struggling for breath. He wants to help it but is repulsed by it. Dumbledore¡¦s voice tells Harry that he cannot help it.

Harry awakens at the scene where he expected to be killed by Voldemort, though he does not show that he¡¦s alive. He listens and watches, and gathers that Voldemort also collapsed and was unconscious, much like Harry. Voldemort sends Narcissa to see if Harry is alive, and Narcissa feels Harry¡¦s beating heart, but instead of betraying him, asks in a whisper if Draco is alive and in the castle. Harry whispers yes, and Narcissa announces that Harry is dead.

Voldemort¡¦s followers celebrate, and Voldemort casts a Cruciatus Curse on Harry, lifting him in the air and toying with his body, though Harry does not feel the pain from the curse as he should. Voldemort orders Hagrid to carry Harry to Hogwarts with them.

At Hogwarts, Voldemort announces that Harry was killed while running away, and orders everyone inside to kneel before him or die. The crowds resist, somehow shaking off the silencing curse Voldemort throws at them, and McGonagall, Ron, and Hermione all shout defiantly at Voldemort.

Neville Longbottom comes forward to confront Voldemort, who tries to win Neville over with promises of a senior position as a Death Eater. Neville rejects Voldemort.

Voldemort summons the Sorting Hat, saying that it won¡¦t be needed anymore and that all of Hogwarts will be in Slytherin. He puts the hat on Neville and lights him on fire.

Neville pulls the Gryffindor Sword out of the hat and kills Nagini, as all of Harry¡¦s supporters and all of Voldemort¡¦s erupt in a fresh battle.

Harry enters the forest. He takes out the Snitch Dumbledore left him, whose message said ¡§I open at the close.¡¨ He tells the Snitch he is about to die, and it opens for him, revealing the cracked Resurrection Stone. Behind him, the shades of his parents appear, as well as Sirius and Lupin, who was killed in the recent battle. The shades tell him they are proud of him and that it doesn¡¦t hurt to die, and they promise to stay with him in his ordeal, invisible to all but him.

Harry goes farther into the forest. He sees dementors, but they are powerless to affect him, as the shades of his loved ones act like Patronuses. In a clearing in the forest, Voldemort stands, surrounded by followers. The hour is up. Voldemort says he thought Harry would come but must have been mistaken. Harry says loudly that he wasn¡¦t, as he steps out of the Cloak and drops the stone, causing the shades to vanish. He keeps his wand put away.

Everyone waits for Voldemort to act. Hagrid, taken prisoner and tied, shouts at Harry but is silenced. Harry thinks of Ginny¡¦s face and her kiss. Voldemort casts the Killing Curse, and everything vanishes for Harry.